Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Purpose 2 Common uses Toggle Common uses subsection 2.1 Education 2.2 Interactive applications 2.3 Commerce 2.3.1 Corporate web sites 2.3.2 Direct marketing 3 References Toggle the table of contents Locator map 1 language فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Map showing the location of a geographic area in context In cartography , a locator map , or just a locator , is typically a simple map used to show the location of a particular geographic region within its larger and presumably more familiar context. Depending on the needs of the cartographer, this type of map can be used on its own or as an inset or addition to a larger map.

Purpose [ edit ] Arthur Robinson , an American cartographer influential in thematic cartography , stated that a map not properly designed "will be a cartographic failure." [ 1 ] Any map that does not take its audience into account by assuming too much reader knowledge about the map area's context will not fulfill its purpose. Location maps help achieve this purpose by familiarizing the reader with the location of an area they may not have read about previously. A good understanding of the audience's mental map for a particular area is critical for a proper application of location maps. 
Used on their own, location maps do not differ significantly from traditional maps, differing primarily in the fact that solitary locator maps focus the attention on a single location within the map frame, where traditional maps generally seek to portray a multitude of features across the entire frame.
More commonly, location maps appear as insets or ancillary maps (maps adjacent to or near the primary map) in order to help the audience place the geographic area being mapped properly inside their internal frame of reference.

Common uses [ edit ] Education [ edit ] Example of a world location map for Algeria.

As educators seek to teach students increasing levels of geography, maps generated for textbooks must reference the expected geographic knowledge of a particular education level. Location maps achieve this purpose by highlighting more in-depth geography within the context the student is familiar with. 
In the United States, this purpose is reinforced by the standards set by the National Council for Geographic Education, which says that "Mental maps, or cognitive maps, are among our most important geographic tools. Because they exist in our minds, they are the maps we use for thinking and decision-making." [ 2 ] Interactive applications [ edit ] Some online applications that allow the user to zoom into an area often include locator maps to assist in navigating the main map or image. For example, Google Maps uses a locator map to orient visitors to its site, included as a toggle button. These locators often feature a movable box that assists the user with navigating the main map.
Other applications using locator software allow people to generate their own location maps by entering some basic information about where they are. This generates a map showing places within a specified radius of that point that meet the user's criteria. Banks, hotels, retail chains, and restaurants are common users of this type of service.

Commerce [ edit ] Simplified locator map displaying places of interest Businesses have a vested interest in letting consumers know where they are located, and frequently use locator maps to help them reach out to potential customers. These maps typically range from a crude schematic map showing nearby crossroads, to more realistic maps that include greater geographic detail and context.

Corporate web sites [ edit ] Businesses such as restaurants and retail establishments often have locator maps online to help potential customers find their location. These are sometimes accompanied by driving and parking directions from one or more directions of travel, especially if many of their customers are not from the local area.

Direct marketing [ edit ] Sample locator map showing the location of a hotel by a highway interchange.

The widespread distribution of sophisticated Geographic Information System (GIS) mapping techniques has allowed the development of large-scale customized locator maps that can be tailored to individual consumers in direct marketing campaigns. This sophistication allows a variety of customized locator maps to be produced in a relatively short period of time.
Major types of direct marketing locator maps are: Single Location : A single business location is shown with major street and road connections. While this type of map can be efficiently constructed using GIS with existing street databases and customized map templates, special software is not required because the map does not change for each direct mailing.

Customer to Business : Using a customer address list, specialized software can frame the map that shows a customer's location in relation to the business, and connects the two using a pre-existing street database.

Multiple Location : Like the single location locator map, a GIS package is not required, though it also can be useful in quickly plotting the locations onto an existing street database using map templates.

Defined Area Locators : [ 3 ] Multiple locations within a defined area are shown.

References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Locator maps .

^ Robinson, A.H. (1953).

Elements of Cartography . New York: John Wiley & Sons.

^ National Council for Geographic Education (1994).

"National Geography Standards" .

Geography Education Standards Project . National Geographic Society Committee on Research and Exploration. Archived from the original on 2008-02-09 . Retrieved 2008-06-24 .

^ Lockmore, Alexander Robert Ulysses (1778).

Annual Register Vol. 21 . London.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Locator_map&oldid=1294297174 " Category : Map types Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 June 2025, at 21:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Locator map 1 language Add topic

