Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Examples 3 Reception 4 Macrohistorical publications 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Macrohistory 11 languages العربية বাংলা Deutsch Français Italiano עברית Norsk bokmål Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Long-term trends in world history Macrohistory seeks out large, long-term trends in world history in search of ultimate patterns by a comparison of proximate details.

[ 1 ] It favors a comparative or world-historical perspective to determine the roots of changes as well as the developmental paths of society or a historical process.

[ 1 ] A macrohistorical study might examine Japanese feudalism and European feudalism to decide whether feudal structures are an inevitable outcome because of certain conditions. Macrohistorical studies often "assume that macro-historical processes repeat themselves in explainable and understandable ways." [ 2 ] The approach can identify stages in the development of humanity as a whole such as the large-scale direction towards greater rationality , greater liberty or the development of productive forces and communist society, among others.

[ 3 ] Description [ edit ] Macrohistory is distinguished from microhistory, which involves the rigorous and in-depth study of a single event in history.

[ 4 ] However, these two can be combined such as the case of studying the larger trends of post- slavery societies, which include the examination of individual cases and smaller groups.

[ 5 ] Macrohistory is also distinguished from metahistory with the way the latter recognizes historical works as "a verbal structure in the form of a narrative prose discourse." [ 6 ] According to Garry Trompf, macrohistory encompasses but is not limited by metahistory by taking in broad prospectus of change, including those that are imaginal or speculative.

[ 7 ] Macrohistory has four "idea frames" – that past events can show: 1) we are progressing; 2) affairs have worsened; 3) everything is repetitive; and, 4) nothing can be understood without an eschaton (end time) or apocatastasis (restoration of all things, or reconstitution).

[ 8 ] Examples [ edit ] Examples of macrohistorical analysis include Oswald Spengler 's assertion that the lifespan of civilizations is limited and ultimately they decay.

[ 3 ] There is also Arnold J. Toynbee 's historical synthesis in explaining the rise and fall of civilizations, which also included those by other historians (e.g.

William H. McNeill 's The Rise of the West ) inspired by his works.

[ 9 ] The Battle of Ain Jalut and the early Mongol conquests are considered by many historians to be of great macrohistorical importance.

[ 10 ] The former marked the high water point of Mongol conquests, and the first time they had ever been decisively defeated.

[ citation needed ] The early conquests, on the other hand, were pursued for the purpose of long-distance trade but disrupted trade networks until the emergence of the so-called Pax Mongolica when trade relations in Eurasia stabilized.

[ 10 ] Reception [ edit ] According to economists Robert Solow , [ 11 ] Brian Snowdon, [ 12 ] Jason Collins, [ 13 ] and to an article in the "Break Through & Mind Changing Idea" section of Wired (Japan), [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Oded Galor 's unified growth theory is a macro-historical analysis that has significantly contributed to the understanding of process of development over the entire course of human history and the role of deep-rooted factors in the transition from stagnation to growth and in the emergence of the vast inequality across the globe.

[ 16 ] Wired (Japan) has described Galor's theory as a global theory comparable to Newton's "law of gravitation", Darwin's "evolution theory" or Einstein's "general relativity".

[ 14 ] Macrohistorical publications [ edit ] Creasy, Edward Shepherd (1851).

The Fifteen Decisive Battles of the World .

Spengler, Oswald (1918).

The Decline of the West .

Quigley, Carroll (1961).

The Evolution of Civilizations .

McNeill, William H. (1976).

Plagues and People .

Roberts, J. M.

(1976).

History of the World .

(2013 edition co-authored by Odd Arne Westad ) Rindos, David (1984).

Origins of Agriculture: an Evolutionary Perspective .

Diamond, Jared (1997).

Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies .

Roberts, Neil (1998).

The Holocene: An Environmental History .

McNeill, J.R.; McNeill, William H. (2003).

The Human Web: A Bird's-Eye View of World History . W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 9780393051797 .

Christian, David G. (2005).

"Macrohistory: The Play of Scales" (PDF) .

Social Evolution & History .

4 (1): 22– 59.

Galor, Oded (2011).

Unified Growth Theory .

Harari, Yuval Noah (2014).

Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind .

See also [ edit ] Big History – Education strategy or academic discipline Cliodynamics – Mathematical modeling of historical processes Cliometrics – Application of econometrics and other formal methods to the study of history Longue durée – Concept in history Microhistory – Intensive historical investigation of a well-defined smaller unit of research Universal history (genre) – History of humanity as a whole unit History References [ edit ] ^ a b Li, Huaiyin (2019).

The Making of the Modern Chinese State: 1600–1950 . Oxon: Routledge.

ISBN 9781138362444 .

^ Matthew C. Wells, Ph.D., Parallelism: A Handbook of Social Analysis . Archived August 24, 2011.

^ a b Morris, Irwin; Oppenheimer, Joe; Soltan, Karol (2004).

Politics from Anarchy to Democracy: Rational Choice in Political Science . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. p. 224.

ISBN 0804745838 .

^ Graham, Shawn; Milligan, Ian; Weingart, Scott (2015).

Exploring Big Historical Data: The Historian's Macroscope . London: Imperial College Press. p. 2.

ISBN 9781783266081 .

^ Araujo, Ana Lucia (2017).

Reparations for Slavery and the Slave Trade: A Transnational and Comparative History . London: Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 7.

ISBN 9781350010598 .

^ Heilmann, MarkAnn; Llewellyn, Mark (2007).

Metafiction and Metahistory in Contemporary Women's Writing . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

2 .

ISBN 9781349281855 .

^ Milani, Milad (2014).

Sufism in the Secret History of Persia . Oxon: Routledge. p. 8.

ISBN 9781844656776 .

^ Handbook of the Theosophical Current . Leiden: BRILL. 2013. p. 375.

ISBN 9789004235960 .

^ Yerxa, Donald A. (2009).

Recent Themes in World History and the History of the West: Historians in Conversation . University of South Carolina Press. p. 3.

ISBN 978-1-57003-831-0 .

^ a b Etkin, Nina Lilian (2009).

Foods of Association: Biocultural Perspectives on Foods and Beverages that Mediate Sociability . Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press. p. 53.

ISBN 978-0-8165-2777-9 .

^ Solow, Robert (May 2011).

Endorsements . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691130026 .

^ Snowdon, Brian (June 2008). "Towards a Unified Theory of Economic Growth. Oded Galor on the transition from Malthusian stagnation to modern economic growth. An interview with introduction by Brian Snowdon".

World Economics .

2 (9).

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.724.3924 .

^ Collins, Jason (2013).

"Galor's Unified Growth Theory" .

Jason Collins Blog .

^ a b Ishikawa, Yoshiko (2018).

"The root of economic disparity is attributed to East Africa ten thousands of years ago: Professor Oded Galor's 'Unified Growth Theory' " .

Wired . Vol. 31.

^ "English Translation of Yoshiko Ishikawa, 'The root of economic disparity is attributed to East Africa ten thousands of years ago: Professor Oded Galor's Unified Growth Theory' " . 2018.

^ Galor, Oded (2011).

Unified Growth Theory . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9781400838868 .

v t e Theories of history Annales Conceptual Cultural Economic Environmental Gender Historicism Marxist Macrohistory Microhistory Postcolonial Politics Postmodern Psychohistory Social List of historians History Big History v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia External links [ edit ] HyperHistory - a visual overview of many history timelines Macrohistory - a comprehensive timeline of historical events GeaCron - an interactive world history atlas Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Macrohistory&oldid=1245537456 " Categories : World history Fields of history Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from July 2016 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2018 This page was last edited on 13 September 2024, at 15:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Macrohistory 11 languages Add topic

