Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Paracelsus 1.2 Other authors and beliefs 1.2.1 Comparison with Buddhism 1.2.2 Comparison with Jainism 1.3 Twentieth century 2 Art and entertainment 3 See also 4 Sources 5 References 6 See also 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Elemental 24 languages العربية Bikol Central Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Suomi Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mythic entity personifying one of the classical elements This article is about alchemic elementals. For other uses of the term, see Elemental (disambiguation) .

"Sagani" redirects here. For the village in Ukraine known in Romanian as Șagani, see Prymorske, Lyman rural hromada .

Undine Rising From the Waters , by Chauncey Bradley Ives Rococo set of personification figurines of the Four Elements , 1760s, Chelsea porcelain An elemental is a mythic supernatural being that is described in occult and alchemical works from around the time of the European Renaissance , and particularly elaborated in the 16th century works of Paracelsus . According to Paracelsus and his subsequent followers, there are four categories of elementals, which are gnomes , undines , sylphs , and salamanders .

[ 1 ] These correspond to the four Empedoclean elements of antiquity: earth , water , air , and fire , respectively. Terms employed for beings associated with alchemical elements vary by source and gloss.

History [ edit ] The Paracelsian concept of elementals draws from several much older traditions in mythology and religion. Common threads can be found in folklore , animism , and anthropomorphism .  Examples of creatures such as the Pygmy were taken from Greek mythology .

The elements of earth, water, air, and fire, were classed as the fundamental building blocks of nature. This system prevailed in the Classical world and was highly influential in medieval natural philosophy . Although Paracelsus uses these foundations and the popular preexisting names of elemental creatures, he is doing so to present new ideas which expand on his own philosophical system.  The homunculus is another example of a Paracelsian idea with roots in earlier alchemical, scientific, and folklore traditions.

Paracelsus [ edit ] In his 16th-century work A Book on Nymphs, Sylphs, Pygmies, and Salamanders, and on the Other Spirits , Paracelsus identified mythological beings as belonging to one of the four elements. Part of the Philosophia Magna, this book was first printed in 1566 after Paracelsus' death.

[ 2 ] He wrote the book to "describe the creatures that are outside the cognizance of the light of nature, how they are to be understood, what marvellous works God has created". He states that there is more bliss in describing these "divine objects" than in describing fencing, court etiquette, cavalry, and other worldly pursuits.

[ 3 ] The following is his archetypal being for each of the four  elements: [ 4 ] Gnome , being of earth Undine , being of water Sylph , being of air Salamander , being of fire The concept of elementals seems to have been conceived by Paracelsus in the 16th century, though he did not in fact use the term "elemental" or a German equivalent.

[ 5 ] He regarded them not so much as spirits but as beings between creatures and spirits, generally being invisible to mankind but having physical and commonly humanoid bodies, as well as eating, sleeping, and wearing clothes like humans. Paracelsus gave common names for the elemental types, as well as correct names, which he seems to have considered somewhat more proper, " recht namen ". He also referred to them by purely German terms which are roughly equivalent to "water people," "mountain people," and so on, using all the different forms interchangeably. His fundamental classification scheme on the first page of Tractatus II of the Book on Nymphs is based on where the elementals live, and he gives the following names: Correct name (translated) Alternate name (Latin) Element in which it lives Nymph Undina ( undine ) Water Sylph Sylvestris ( wild man ) Air Pygmy Gnomus ( gnome ) Earth Salamander Vulcanus Fire Of the names he used, gnomus , undina , and sylph are all thought to have appeared first in Paracelsus' works, though undina is a fairly obvious Latin derivative from the word unda meaning "wave." In De Meteoris he referred to the elementals collectively as Sagani .

[ 6 ] He noted that undines are similar to humans in size, while sylphs are rougher, coarser, longer, and stronger. Gnomes are short, while salamanders are long, narrow, and lean. The elementals are said to be able to move through their own elements as human beings move through air. Gnomes, for example, can move through rocks, walls, and soil. Sylphs are the closest to humans in his conception because they move through air like we do, while in fire they burn, in water they drown, and in earth, they get stuck. Paracelsus states that each one stays healthy in its particular " chaos ," as he terms it, but dies in the others.

Paracelsus conceived human beings to be composed of three parts, an elemental body, a sidereal spirit, and an immortal divine soul. Elementals lacked this last part, the immortal soul. However, by marriage with a human being, the elemental and its offspring could gain a soul.

[ 7 ] Other authors and beliefs [ edit ] In his influential De Occulta Philosophia , published in 1531–33, [ 8 ] several decades before the publication of Paracelsus' Philosophia Magna , Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa also wrote of four classes of spirits corresponding to the four elements. However, he did not give special names for the classes: "In like manner they distribute these into more orders, so as some are fiery, some watery, some aerial, some terrestrial." Agrippa did however give an extensive list of various mythological beings of this type, although without clarifying which belongs to which elemental class.

[ 9 ] Like Paracelsus, he did not use the term "elemental spirit" per se .

A 1670 French satire of occult philosophy, Comte de Gabalis , was prominent in popularizing Paracelsus' theory of elementals.

[ 10 ] It particularly focused on the idea of elemental marriage discussed by Paracelsus. In the book, the titular "Count of Kabbalah " explains that members of his order (to which Paracelsus is said to belong) refrain from marriage to human beings in order to retain their freedom to bestow souls upon elementals.

Comte de Gabalis used the terms sylphide and gnomide to refer to female sylphs and gnomes (often "sylphid" and "gnomid" in English translations). Male nymphs (the term used instead of the Paracelsian "undine") are said to be rare, while female salamanders are rarely seen.

[ 11 ] The Rosicrucians claimed to be able to see such elemental spirits. To be admitted to their society, it was previously necessary for the eyes to be purged with the Panacea or "Universal Medicine," a legendary alchemical substance with miraculous curative powers. As well, glass globes would be prepared with one of the four elements and for one month exposed to beams of sunlight. With these steps the initiated would see innumerable beings immediately. These beings, known as elementals, were said to be longer lived than man but ceased to exist upon death. However, if the elemental were to wed a mortal, they would become immortal. This exception seemed to work in reverse when it came to immortals, though, for if an elemental were to wed an immortal being, the immortal would gain the mortality of the elemental. One of the conditions of joining the Rosicrucians however, was a vow of chastity in hopes of marrying an elemental.

[ 12 ] Comparison with Buddhism [ edit ] The Four Heavenly Kings rule over the eastern, southern, western and northern cardinal directions which are inhabited by gandharvas , kumbhandas , nāgas , and yakshas , respectively. These spiritual beings are reminiscent of the elementals found in the Paracelsian tradition. Different Buddhist traditions in Asia, including those of Tibet and China associate the cardinal directions with elements as well.

[ 13 ] Comparison with Jainism [ edit ] In Jainism , there is a superficially similar concept within its general cosmology , the ekendriya jiva , "one-sensed beings" with bodies ( kaya ) that are composed of a single element, albeit with a 5-element system (earth, water, air, fire, and plant), but these beings are actual physical objects and phenomena such as rocks, rain, fires and so on which are endowed with souls ( jiva ).

[ 14 ] In the Paracelsian concept, elementals are conceived more as supernatural humanoid beings which are much like human beings except for lacking souls. This is quite the opposite from the Jain conception which rather than positing soulless elementals is positing that physical objects have some type of soul and that what are commonly considered inanimate objects have this particular type of soul.

Twentieth century [ edit ] In contemporary times there are those who study and practice rituals to invoke elementals. These include Wiccans, and followers of nature-based religions.

[ 15 ] [ citation needed ] Art and entertainment [ edit ] Further information: Alchemy in art and entertainment Elementals became popular characters in Romantic literature after Paracelsus. Even by the 17th century, elemental spirits after the Paracelsian concept appeared in works by John Dryden and in the Comte de Gabalis .

[ 16 ] Alexander Pope cited Comte de Gabalis as his source for elemental lore in his 1712 poem The Rape of the Lock .

The Sprites of fiery Termagants in Flame Mount up, and take a Salamander's name.

Soft yielding minds to Water glide away, And sip, with Nymphs, their elemental Tea.

The graver Prude sinks downward to a Gnome, In search of mischief still on Earth to roam.

The light Coquettes in Sylphs aloft repair, And sport and flutter in the fields of Air.

— Alexander Pope, the Rape of the Lock, Canto 1 Fouqué's wildly popular 1811 novella Undine is one of the most influential literary examples. Another example is the DC Comics superhero team The Elementals, composed of the characters Gnome, Sylph, Salamander, and Undine.

[ 17 ] Blackwood introduces an elemental in the novella The Nemesis of Fire . Elementals related to the four classical elements appeared in the fiction of Michael Moorcock , notably his 1972 novel Elric of Melniboné , and a variant appeared in the 1970s Dungeons & Dragons role-playing game . The concept has since been expanded on in numerous other fantasy , computer and trading card games .

See also [ edit ] Aether/Quintessence Classical elements Kami Sigil Tattva Jainism Sources [ edit ] "Undine".

Encyclopædia Britannica Online . Encyclopædia Britannica. 2006 . Retrieved 16 November 2006 .

Theophrast von Hohenheim a.k.a. Paracelsus (1933). "Liber de nymphis, sylphis, pygmaeis, et salamandris et de caeteris spiritibus". In Sudhoff, Karl ; Matthießen, Wilhm. (eds.).

Sämtliche Werke . Munich: Oldenbourg. abt. 1, v. 14, sec. 7.

References [ edit ] ^ Carole B. Silver, Strange and Secret Peoples: Fairies and Victorian Consciousness , p. 38 ISBN 0-19-512199-6 ^ Paracelsus. Four Treatises of Theophrastus Von Hohenheim Called Paracelsus. JHU Press, 1996. p. 222 ^ Paracelsus. Four Treatises of Theophrastus Von Hohenheim Called Paracelsus. JHU Press, 1996. p. 224 ^ Carole B. Silver, Strange and Secret Peoples: Fairies and Victorian Consciousness , p. 38 ISBN 0-19-512199-6 ^ Paracelsus, Liber de nymphis, sylphis, pygmaeis et salamandris et de caeteris spiritibus.

in Philosophia magna, de divinis operibus et seretis naturae. V. 1.

Date unknown, but thought to be a later work.

^ Pagel, Walter (1982).

Paracelsus: An Introduction to Philosophical Medicine in the Era of the Renaissance . Karger Medical and Scientific Publishers. pp.

61– 62.

^ Dennison, Christina Pollock (1911).

The Paracelsus of Robert Browning . New York: The Baker and Taylor Company. pp.

42– 43 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ Van Der Poel, Marc (1997).

Cornelius Agrippa: The Humanist Theologian and His Declamations . Brill. p. 44.

^ De Occulta Philosophia Book 3, Ch. 16, English translation of 1651 ^ Veenstra, Jan R. (2013). "Paracelsian Spirits in Pope's Rape of the Lock". In Olsen, Karin E.; Veenstra, Jan R. (eds.).

Airy Nothings: Imagining the Otherworld of Faerie from the Middle Ages to the Age of Reason: Essays in Honour of Alasdair A. MacDonald . BRILL. pp.

213– 240.

ISBN 978-90-04-25823-5 .

^ de Montfaucon de Villars, N.-P.-H. (1913) [1670].

Comte de Gabalis . London: The Brothers, Old Bourne Press.

OCLC 6624965 .

^ William Godwin (1876).

Lives of the Necromancers . London, F. J. Mason. p.

23 .

^ * "Onmark Productions: SHITENNŌ = Four Heavenly Kings" . Retrieved 13 January 2025 .

^ Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Plants, various one-celled animals, and 'elemental' beings (beings made of one of the four elements—earth, air, fire, or water) have only one sense, the sense of touch. Worms and many insects have the senses of touch and taste.  - ^ "Llewellyn Worldwide - Articles: Understanding Elementals" .

^ Dryden, John (1970). Nozak, M.E.; Guffey, M.E. (eds.).

The Works of John Dryden,: Plays - The Tempest, Tyrannick Love, an Evening's Love . University of California Press. pp.

423– 424.

^ E. Nelson Bridwell ( w ), Ramona Fradon ( p ), Bob Smith ( i ), Gene D'Angelo ( col ), Shelly Leferman ( let ), Larry Hama ( ed ). "Elementary!" Super Friends , vol. 1, no. 14 (November 1978).

New York, NY : DC Comics .

See also [ edit ] Deva (Theosophy) External links [ edit ] Look up elemental in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Collected Works of Paracelsus V. 14 at the University of Braunschweig (German) v t e Fairies in folklore Classifications of fairies Related articles Álfheimr Changeling Elfshot Elves in fiction Middle-earth Fairy godmother Fairy-lock Fairy painting Fairy riding Fairy tale List Fairy Tale (color) Familiar Genius loci Household deity Hungry grass Nature spirit Sacred trees and groves Celtic Germanic Tutelary deity Water spirit Abodes and structures Fairy fort Fairyland Fairy path Fairy ring Attested fairies A–E Adhene Aibell Alp Luachra Anjana Aos Sí (Aes Sídhe) Arkan Sonney Asrai Baobhan sith Banshee Barghest Bean nighe Billy Blind Biróg Bloody Bones Bluecap Blue men of the Minch Bodach Boggart Bogle Boobrie Brag Brownie Brown Man of the Muirs Bucca Buggane Bugbear Bugul Noz Caoineag Cat sìth Cù Sìth Ceffyl Dŵr Clíodhna Clurichaun Coblynau Colt pixie Cyhyraeth Drude Duende Duergar Dullahan Dunnie Each-uisge Elf Alp Dökkálfar and Ljósálfar Elegast Erlking Half-elf Huldufólk Queen of Elphame Svartálfar F–L Fachan Fairy Queen Fear dearg Fear gorta Fenodyree Finfolk Finvarra Fuath Gancanagh Ghillie Dhu Glaistig Glashtyn Groac'h Grindylow Gwragedd Annwn Gwyllion Gwyn ap Nudd Habetrot Hag Haltija The Hedley Kow Heinzelmännchen Hinzelmann Hob Hobbididance Hobgoblin Hödekin Iannic-ann-ôd Jack-o'-lantern Jack o' the bowl Jenny Greenteeth Joan the Wad Joint-eater Kelpie Kilmoulis Knocker Knucker Kobold Klabautermann Korrigan Lady of the Lake Lazy Laurence Leanan sídhe Leprechaun Lubber fiend Lutin Ly Erg M–Z Mare Margot the fairy Meg Mullach Melusine Merrow Mooinjer veggey Morgen Morvarc'h Moss people Nain Rouge Nelly Longarms Nicnevin/Gyre-Carling Nisse Nixie Nuckelavee Nuggle Oberon Peg Powler Pillywiggin Pixie Púca/Pwca Puck Rå Bergsrå Hulder Radande Sjörå Skogsrå Redcap Schrat Sebile Selkie Seonaidh Shellycoat Sleih beggey Sluagh Spriggan Sprite/Water sprite Sylph Titania Tomte Tooth fairy Trow Tylwyth Teg Undine Water bull Water horse Wicked fairy Wight Will-o'-the-wisp Wirry-cow Xana Yallery Brown Yan-gant-y-tan Fairy-like beings worldwide Worldwide Bogeyman Crone Demon Humanoid Little people Merfolk Mermaid Merman UFO Vampire Africa Abatwa Asanbosam Aziza Bultungin Eloko Jengu Kishi Mami Wata Obayifo Rompo Simbi Tikoloshe Yumboes Americas Alux Anchimayen Caipora Canotila Chaneque Christmas elf Chullachaqui Curupira Encantado Fastachee Fearsome critters Grey alien Hopkinsville Goblins Ishigaq Jogah Little green men Muki Nimerigar Nordic alien Nûñnë'hï Pombero Pukwudgie Saci Trauco Yunwi Tsunsdi Asia Diwata Dokkaebi Fallen angel Fox spirit Hồ ly tinh Huli jing Huxian Inari Ōkami Kitsune Kumiho Hyang Irshi Jinn Ifrit Kijimuna Korpokkur Mazzikin Mogwai Mrenh kongveal Orang bunian Peri Preta Hungry ghost Tennin Yaksha / Yakshini Yōkai Yōsei Oceania Bunyip Manaia Menehune Mimis Muldjewangk Nawao Patupaiarehe Ponaturi Taniwha Tipua Wandjina Yara-ma-yha-who Europe Eastern Bannik Căpcăun Domovoy Iele Karzełek Kikimora Leshy Lidérc Likho Ovinnik Polevik Rübezahl Rusalka Samodiva Sânziană Siren Spiriduș Ursitory Vadleany Vâlvă Vântoase Vodyanoy Zână Northern Aitvaras Ajatar Badb Black dog Ent Gabija Gremlin Haltija Headless Horseman Hiisi Hobbit Jack Frost Jimmy Squarefoot Lauma Menninkäinen Morgan Le Fay Pictish Beast Troll Tuatha Dé Danann Southern Basajaun Centaur Cercopes Circe Dionysus Doñas de fuera Farfadet Faun Hecate Hippocampus Kallikantzaros Kobalos Lamina Mairu Mouro Enchanted Moura Nymph List Pan Satyr Silenus Siren Squasc Thiasus Trenti Vila Western Dames blanches Dusios Dwarf Imp Lorelei Perchta Venus in German legend Vittra Witte Wieven / Weiße Frauen Cross-regional Christmas gift-bringer Santa Claus Companions of Elemental Fates Goblin Gnome Ogre Salamander Sandman Wild man See also List of hybrid creatures in folklore List of beings referred to as fairies Category v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Accidental travel Action-adventure Lost world Sword and sorcery Wuxia Alternate history Chuanyue Contemporary Children's fantasy Comedy Bangsian Dark fantasy Grimdark Fairy tale parodies Fairytale fantasy Fantastique Fantasy of manners Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai LitRPG Low fantasy Magical girl Mythic Mythpunk Mythopoeia Omegaverse Progression Romantic Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Shenmo Urban fantasy Occult detective fiction Paranormal romance Weird fiction New weird Weird West Fantasy Western Xianxia Media Film and television Anime Films highest-grossing S&S Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels A–H I–R S–Z List of story collections Publishers Magazines Fantastic Fantastic Adventures Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Other Dungeons & Dragons Féeries Podcasts Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Saturn Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Fandom Art Fanspeak Filk music Harry Potter fandom The Inklings Lovecraft fandom Mythopoeic Society Tolkien fandom Tolkien's influence Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Devils Ghouls Elementals Faeries Familiars Fire-breathing monsters Chimera Dragons Gargoyles Imps Jinn Nymphs Shapeshifters Werecats Werewolves Skin-walkers Spirits Talking animals Undead Death Ghosts Liches Mummies Skeletons Vampires Zombies Unicorns Yōkai Characters Barbarian Caveman Damsel in distress Dark lord Donor Dragonslayer Fairy godmother Heroes Magicians Occult detective list Wild man Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / neutral / light Ceremonial Love Moon Magic item Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Runes Wand Schools Alchemy Demonology Divination Egregore Evocation Incantation Necromancy Runecraft Shamanism Shapeshifting Thaumaturgy Theurgy Witchcraft Fantasy races Centaurs Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Kobolds Leprechauns Merfolk Mermaids Mermen Ogres Oni Orcs Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Maps Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Magic school Related Allegory Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Ghost stories Gothic fiction Horror fiction LGBT themes in speculative fiction Mecha Mythology Science fiction Supernatural fiction Superhero Tokusatsu Kaiju Urban legend Outline Category Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐brls5
Cached time: 20250812000538
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.527 seconds
Real time usage: 0.699 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2240/1000000
Revision size: 16169/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 141371/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2339/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 68776/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.294/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7062171/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  527.069      1 -total
 24.34%  128.305      8 Template:Navbox
 18.78%   98.977      1 Template:Fairies
 16.72%   88.121      1 Template:Reflist
 14.82%   78.124      1 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
 12.86%   67.791      1 Template:Short_description
  9.53%   50.255      8 Template:Cite_book
  6.92%   36.455      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.50%   34.262      1 Template:Citation_needed
  5.85%   30.849      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:263153:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000538 and revision id 1300427300. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Elemental&oldid=1300427300 " Category : Elementals Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2015 This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 07:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Elemental 24 languages Add topic

