Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Attributed works 3 Notes 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Bernard Trevisan 8 languages Deutsch Esperanto Français Italiano مصرى Português Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fictional Italian alchemist This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Bernard Trevisan" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Bernard Trevisan [ˈtreːvizan] ( Bernard of Treviso , Bernardus Trevisanus ) was a fictional Italian alchemist who lived from 1406 to 1490.

[ 1 ] His biography has been composed by editors and commentators of alchemical texts from the 16th century. It is said that he was born into a noble family in Padua and spent his entire life spending his family fortune in search of the Philosopher's stone . The mythical character emerged by a confusion with the alchemist called Bernard of Trier . A recent study founded a chronicle of his death in 1387. He has been identified with Eberhard I von der Mark (1305-1387), a law graduate and clergyman, who became chorbishop of Cologne .

[ 2 ] He resigned his positions in the Church to marry in 1346 with Maria de Looz-Agimont (ca.1336-1410), whose titles and territories counties were key points in feudal disputes involving Von der Marck family. From 1366 he was closely related to Kuno II von Falkenstein (ca.1320-1388), archbishop of Trier.

Biography [ edit ] The fictional Bernard Trevisan began his career as an alchemist at the age of fourteen.

[ 3 ] He had his family's permission, as they also desired to increase their wealth. He first worked with a monk of Cîteaux named Gotfridus Leurier. They attempted for eight years to fashion the Philosopher's stone out of hen eggshells and egg yolk purified in horse manure.

[ 4 ] He is believed to have been influential on the work of Gilles de Rais in the 1430s.

[ 5 ] He then worked with minerals and natural salts using distillation and crystallization methods borrowed from Jabir ibn Hayyan and Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi . When these failed he turned to vegetable and animal material, finally using human blood and urine . He gradually sold his wealth to buy secrets and hints towards the stone, most often from swindlers. He traveled all over the known world, including the Baltics, Germany, Spain, France, Vienna, Egypt, Palestine, Persia, Greece, Turkey, and Cyprus, to find hints left by past alchemists. His health had been deteriorating, most likely from the fumes he had created with his alchemy. He retired to the Island of Rhodes, still working on the Philosopher's stone until his death in 1490.

Attributed works [ edit ] In the sixteenth century, several alchemical works were attributed to Bernard. For example, Trevisanus de Chymico miraculo, quod lapidem philosophiae appellant was edited in 1583 by Gerhard Dorn .

The Answer of Bernardus Trevisanus, to the Epistle of Thomas of Bononia , [ 6 ] and The Prefatory Epistle of Bernard Earl of Tresne , in English, appeared in the 1680 Aurifontina Chymica .

[ 7 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ DIDIER KAHN, (2003), “Recherches sur le Livre attribué au prétendu Bernard le Trévisan (fin du XVe siècle)”, en: Chiara Crisciani & Agostino Paravicini Bagliani (eds.) Alchimia e medicina nel Medioevo, SISMEL – Edizioni del Galluzzo, Firenze, pp. 265-336.

^ José Rodríguez Guerrero, (2014-2018), “El Correctorium alchimiae (ca.1352-1362) de Ricardus Anglicus y la versión de Bernardus Magnus de Tréveris”, Azogue , 8, pp. 216-270.

^ "Crucibles Summary CHP 1-4" .

online.redwoods.cc.ca.us . Archived from the original on 4 October 2006 . Retrieved 13 January 2022 .

^ A.E. Waite, The Lives of the Alchemystical Philosophers (London, 1888), 126.

^ Roland Villeneuve, Gilles de Rais p128, Editions Denoel 1955 ^ Thomas of Bononia being described as physician to Charles VIII of France , king at the end of the fifteenth century.

^ "Aurifontina Chymica: or, a collection of fourteen small treatises concerning the first matter of philosophers, for the discovery of their (hitherto so much concealed) Mercury. Which many have studiously endeavoured to hide, but these to make manifest, for the benefit of Mankind in general" .

www.alchemywebsite.com . Database of alchemy printed books . Retrieved 2024-07-22 .

Further reading [ edit ] Kibre, Pearl (1970). "Bernard of Trevisan".

Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Vol. 2. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. pp.

22– 23.

ISBN 0-684-10114-9 .

Jaffe, Bernard (1976).

Crucibles: The Story of Chemistry, from ancient alchemy to nuclear fission (4 ed.). New York: Dover Publications Ltd.

Kahn, Didier (2003). "Recherches sur le ‘Livre’ attribué au prétendu Bernard le Trévisan (fin du XVe siècle)", in "Alchimia e medicina nel Medioevo", Micrologus Library IX.

Gallina, Furio (2015). "Miti e storie di alchimisti tra il medioevo e l'età contemporanea", Resana: mp/edizioni.

José Rodríguez Guerrero, (2014-2018), “El Correctorium alchimiae (ca.1352-1362) de Ricardus Anglicus y la versión de Bernardus Magnus de Tréveris”, Azogue , 8, pp. 216–270.

External links [ edit ] Parable of the Fountain v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Netherlands Poland Israel Belgium People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bernard_Trevisan&oldid=1303037014 " Category : Fictional Italian people Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2009 All articles needing additional references Pages with Italian IPA This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 19:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bernard Trevisan 8 languages Add topic

