Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Tectonic history 2 Recent tectonic activity 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Burma plate 23 languages العربية বাংলা Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latviešu Македонски Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Minor tectonic plate in Southeast Asia Burma plate Depicted at center, shaded in light red Type Minor Approximate area 1,100,000 km 2 [ 1 ] Movement 1 north Speed 1 46 mm/year Features Andaman Sea 1 Relative to the African plate The Burma plate, showing boundaries with the India plate (the Sunda Trench) and the Sunda plate (through the Andaman Sea ) The Burma plate is a minor tectonic plate or microplate located in Southeast Asia , sometimes considered a part of the larger Eurasian plate . The Andaman Islands , Nicobar Islands , and northwestern Sumatra are located on the plate. This island arc separates the Andaman Sea from the main Indian Ocean to the west.

To its east lies the Sunda plate , from which it is separated along a transform boundary , running in a rough north–south line through the Andaman Sea. This boundary between the Burma and Sunda plates is a marginal seafloor spreading centre , which has led to the opening up of the Andaman Sea (from a southerly direction) by "pushing out" the Andaman-Nicobar-Sumatra island arc from mainland Asia, a process which began in earnest approximately 4 million years ago.

To the west is the much larger India plate , which is subducting beneath the western facet of the Burma plate. This extensive subduction zone has formed the Sunda Trench .

Tectonic history [ edit ] In models of the reconstructed tectonic history of the area, the generally northwards movement of the Indo-Australian plate resulted in its substantive collision with the Eurasian continent , which began during the Eocene epoch , approximately 50–55 million years ago ( Ma ). This collision with Asia began the orogenic uplift which has formed the Himalaya mountains, as well as the fracturing of the Indo-Australian plate into the modern Indian plate, Australian plate , and possibly Capricorn plate .

[ 2 ] As the India plate drifted northwards at a relatively rapid rate of an average 16 cm/yr, it also rotated in a counterclockwise direction. As a result of this movement and rotation, the convergence along the plate's eastern boundary (the Burma–Andaman–Malay region) with Eurasia was at an oblique angle.

[ citation needed ] The transform forces along this subduction front started the clockwise bending of the Sunda arc; in the late Oligocene (ca. 32 Ma) further faulting developed and the Burma and Sunda microplates began to "break off" from the larger Eurasian plate.

[ citation needed ] After a further series of transform faulting, and the continuing subduction of the India plate beneath the Burma plate, backarc spreading saw the formation of the marginal basin and seafloor spreading centre which would become the Andaman Sea, a process well-underway by the mid- Pliocene (3–4 Ma).

[ citation needed ] Western Sunda Arc and Trench showing tectonic and seismic activity.

Recent tectonic activity [ edit ] On December 26, 2004, a large portion of the boundary between the Burma plate and the Indian plate slipped, causing the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami .

[ 3 ] This megathrust earthquake had an estimated moment magnitude of 9.1–9.3 M w .

[ 4 ] Over 1,600 kilometres (990 mi) of the boundary underwent thrust faulting and shifted up to 5 metres (16 ft) vertically and 11 metres (36 ft) horizontally.

[ 4 ] This rapid rise in the sea floor over such a short time (seven minutes [ 4 ] ) generated a massive tsunami that killed approximately 229,800 people along the coast of the Indian Ocean.

References [ edit ] ^ "Sizes of Tectonic or Lithospheric Plates" . Geology.about.com. 2014-03-05. Archived from the original on 2016-06-05 . Retrieved 2016-02-02 .

^ Gordon, Richard G. (2009-03-01). "Lithospheric Deformation in the equatorial Indian Ocean: Timing and Tibet".

Geology .

37 (3): 287– 288.

Bibcode : 2009Geo....37..287G .

doi : 10.1130/focus032009.1 .

^ "Thirty-eight Indian cities in high-risk earthquake zones" .

The Times of India .

^ a b c Strand, Carl; John Masek (2008).

Sumatra-Andaman Islands earthquake and tsunami of December 26, 2004 : lifeline performance . Reston, Va.: American Society of Civil Engineers.

doi : 10.1061/9780784409510 .

ISBN 9780784409510 .

Further reading [ edit ] Curray, JR.

"2002 Chapman Conference on Continent – Ocean Interactions within the East Asian Marginal Seas" (PDF) .

Tectonics and History of the Andaman Sea Region (abstract) . Archived from the original (PDF) on March 23, 2005 . Retrieved September 8, 2005 .

pdf Paul, J., Burgmann, R., Gaur, V. K., Bilham, R., Larson, K. M.

, Ananda, M. B., Jade, S., Mukal, M., Anupama, T. S.. Satyal, G., Kumar, D. 2001 The motion and active deformation of India. Geophys. Res. Lett. Vol. 28, No. 04, 647–651 2001.

v t e Tectonic plates Major plates African Antarctic Eurasian Indo-Australian Australian Indian North American Pacific South American Minor plates Amurian Arabian Burma Caribbean Caroline Cocos Indian Nazca New Hebrides Okhotsk Philippine Scotia Somali Sunda Yangtze Microplates Adriatic Aegean Sea Anatolian Balmoral Reef Banda Sea Bird's Head Capricorn Coiba Conway Reef Explorer Futuna Galápagos Gonâve Gorda Greenland Halmahera Iberian Iranian Juan de Fuca Juan Fernández Kerguelen Kermadec Lwandle Madagascar Malpelo Manus Maoke Mariana Molucca Sea Niuafo’ou North Andes North Bismarck North Galápagos Okinawa Panama Pelso Philippine Mobile Belt Rivera Rovuma Sangihe Seychelles Shetland Solomon Sea South Bismarck South Sandwich Timor Tisza Tonga Trobriand Victoria Woodlark Ancient plates Baltic Bellingshausen Charcot Cimmeria Farallon Insular Intermontane Izanagi Kula Lhasa Malvinas Moa Phoenix Kshiroda Oceanic ridges Aden Ridge Carlsberg Ridge Central Indian Ridge Chile Ridge Cocos Ridge East Pacific Rise Explorer Ridge Gakkel Ridge Galápagos Spreading Center Gorda Ridge Juan de Fuca Ridge Mid-Atlantic Ridge Knipovich Ridge Kolbeinsey Ridge Mohns Ridge Reykjanes Ridge Pacific–Antarctic Ridge South American–Antarctic Ridge Southeast Indian Ridge Southwest Indian Ridge Ancient oceanic ridges Aegir Ridge Alpha Ridge Antarctic–Phoenix Ridge Kula–Farallon Ridge Mid-Labrador Ridge Pacific–Farallon Ridge Pacific–Kula Ridge Geology portal List Category Commons v t e Tectonic plates of Southeast Asia – New Guinea ( Australian plate – Pacific plate convergence zone) Large Caroline plate Philippine Sea plate Sunda plate Small West Burma plate Philippines Philippine Mobile Belt Indonesia Banda Sea plate Bird's Head plate Halmahera plate Molucca Sea Collision Zone Molucca Sea plate Sangihe plate Timor plate New Guinea Maoke plate North Bismarck plate Manus plate Solomon Sea plate South Bismarck plate Trobriand plate Woodlark plate Faults Flores back-arc thrust fault Great Sumatran Fault Marikina Valley fault system New Britain subduction zone Palu-Koro Fault Philippine fault system Ramu-Markham Fault Sorong Fault Trenches and troughs Java Trench (Sunda) with Mentawai Trough Sunda Trough Timor Trough Philippines Cotabato Trench Manila Trench North Luzon Trough Negros Trench Palawan Trench Philippine Trench East Luzon Trench Sulu Trench Sulawesi and Moluccas Aru Trough Banda Trench Ceram Trough Salajar Trough Sangihe Trough Talaud Trough Ternate Trough Timor Aur Trough Tanimbar Trough New Guinea Ayu Trough Kilinailau Trench Manokwari Trough Lyra Trough Mussau Trough New Guinea Trench Pocklington Trough New Britain Trench (Bougainville) West Caroline Trough West Melanesian Trench Subsea plateaus and basins Arafura Basin Aru-Tanimbar Basin Bengkulu Basin Benham Plateau Bula Basin East Natuna Basin Geelvinck (Cendrawasih) Basin Manus Basin Minahasa Basin North Australian Basin North Biak Basin North Flores Basin Northern East Java Basin Northern Makassar Basin Ontong Java Plateau Sawu Basin Southern Makassar Basin Talaud Basin Weber Deep West Halmahera Basin West Natuna Basin Woodlark Basin v t e Tectonic plates of Indochina ( Eurasian plate - Indian plate Convergence Zone) Plate tectonics Andaman microplate Burma plate Eurasian plate Indian plate Sunda plate Yangtze plate Faults and rift zones Kyaukkyan Fault Mae Chan Fault Red River Fault Sagaing Fault Three Pagodas Fault West Andaman Fault Geology portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Burma_plate&oldid=1283055340 " Categories : Tectonic plates Geology of Asia Geology of the Indian Ocean Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Articles using Mw magnitude scale This page was last edited on 30 March 2025, at 04:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Burma plate 23 languages Add topic

