Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Religion and proselytization 2 Religion and power 3 Buddhism 4 Christianity Toggle Christianity subsection 4.1 Late Antiquity 4.2 Medieval western Europe 4.3 Early modern Iberian peninsula 4.4 European wars of religion 4.5 Colonial Americas 4.6 Russia 4.7 Goa Inquisition 4.8 Papal States 4.9 Serbs during World War II in Yugoslavia 5 Hinduism 6 Islam Toggle Islam subsection 6.1 Against Christians 6.2 Jizya and conversion 6.3 Druze 6.4 Early period 6.5 Umayyad Caliphate 6.6 Almohad Caliphate 6.7 Seljuk Empire 6.8 Danishmend's campaigns 6.9 Yemen 6.10 Ottoman Empire 6.11 Iran 6.12 Indian Subcontinent 6.13 Contemporary period 6.13.1 South Asia 6.13.1.1 Bangladesh 6.13.1.2 India 6.13.1.3 Pakistan 6.13.2 Indonesia 6.13.3 West Asia 6.13.4 United Kingdom 7 Judaism 8 Atheism Toggle Atheism subsection 8.1 Eastern Bloc 8.2 French Revolution 8.3 East Asia 8.4 Revolutionary Mexico 8.5 Southeast Asia 9 See also 10 References Toggle the table of contents Forced conversion 17 languages العربية অসমীয়া বাংলা فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia ಕನ್ನಡ 日本語 Polski Русский Simple English Српски / srpski தமிழ் Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Adoption of a different religion or irreligion under duress For conversion of data types, see Type punning .

Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Forced conversion is the adoption of a religion or irreligion under duress .

[ 1 ] Someone who has been forced to convert to a different religion or irreligion may continue, covertly, to adhere to the beliefs and practices which were originally held, while outwardly behaving as a convert.

Crypto-Jews , Crypto-Christians , Crypto-Muslims , Crypto-Hindus and Crypto-Pagans are historical examples of the latter.

Religion and proselytization [ edit ] The religions of the world are divided into two groups: those that actively  seek new followers (missionary religions) and those that do not (non-missionary religions). This classification dates back to a lecture given by Max Müller in 1873, and is based on whether or not a religion seeks to gain new converts. The three main religions classified as missionary religions are Christianity , Islam , and Buddhism , while the non-missionary religions include Judaism , Hinduism , and Zoroastrianism . Other religions, such as Primal Religions, Confucianism , and Taoism , may also be considered non-missionary religions.

[ 2 ] Religion and power [ edit ] In general, anthropologists have shown that the relationship between religion and politics is complex, especially when it is viewed over the expanse of human history .

[ 3 ] While religious leaders and the state generally have different aims, both are concerned about power and order; both use reason and emotion to motivate behavior. Throughout history, leaders of religious and political institutions have cooperated, opposed one another, and/or attempted to co-opt each other, for purposes which are both noble and base, and they have implemented programs with a wide range of driving values, from compassion , which is aimed at alleviating current suffering, to brutal change, which is aimed at achieving long-term goals, for the benefit of groups which have ranged from small cliques to all of humanity. The relationship is far from simple. But religion has frequently been used in a coercive manner, and it has also used coercion.

[ 3 ] Buddhism [ edit ] People may express their faith through the act of taking refuge , and conversions usually require people to recite their acceptance of the Triple Gems of Buddhism . However, they may always practice Buddhism without fully abandoning their own religion.

[ 4 ] According to Chin Human Rights Organisation (CHRO), Christians from the Chin ethnic minority group in Myanmar are facing coercion to convert to Buddhism by state actors and programme.

[ 5 ] Christianity [ edit ] See also: Christianization , Classical antiquity , History of Christianity , Spread of Christianity , and Christianity and colonialism Christianity was a minority religion during much of the middle Roman Classical Period , and the early Christians were persecuted during that time . When Constantine I converted to Christianity , it had already grown to be the dominant religion of the Roman Empire. Already under the reign of Constantine I, Christian heretics were being persecuted; beginning in the late 4th century, the ancient pagan religions were also actively suppressed . In the view of many historians, the Constantinian shift turned Christianity from a persecuted religion into a religion which was capable of persecuting and sometimes eager to persecute.

[ 6 ] Late Antiquity [ edit ] See also: State church of the Roman Empire On 27 February 380, together with Gratian and Valentinian II , Theodosius I issued the decree Cunctos populos , the so-called Edict of Thessalonica , recorded in the Codex Theodosianus xvi.1.2 . This declared Trinitarian Nicene Christianity to be the only legitimate imperial religion and the only one entitled to call itself Catholic . Other Christians he described as "foolish madmen".

[ 7 ] He also ended official state support for the traditional polytheist religions and customs.

[ 8 ] The Codex Theodosianus (Eng. Theodosian Code) was a compilation of the laws of the Roman Empire under the Christian emperors since 312. A commission was established by Theodosius II and his co-emperor Valentinian III on 26 March 429 [ 9 ] [ 10 ] and the compilation was published by a constitution of 15 February 438. It went into force in the eastern and western parts of the empire on 1 January 439.

[ 9 ] It is Our will that all the peoples who are ruled by the administration of Our Clemency shall practice that religion which the divine Peter the Apostle transmitted to the Romans.... The rest, whom We adjudge demented and insane, shall sustain the infamy of heretical dogmas, their meeting places shall not receive the name of churches, and they shall be smitten first by divine vengeance and secondly by the retribution of Our own initiative (Codex Theodosianus XVI 1.2.).

[ 11 ] Forced conversions of Jews were carried out with the support of rulers during Late Antiquity and the early Middle Ages in Gaul , the Iberian Peninsula and in the Byzantine Empire .

[ 12 ] In Gregory of Tours ' writing, he claimed that the Vandals attempted to force all Spanish Catholics to become Arian Christians during their rule in Spain. Gregory also recounted episodes of forced conversion of Jews by Chilperic I and Avitus of Clermont .

[ 13 ] Medieval western Europe [ edit ] During the Saxon Wars , Charlemagne , King of the Franks , forcibly converted the Saxons from their native Germanic paganism by way of warfare, and law upon conquest. Examples are the Massacre of Verden in 782, when Charlemagne reportedly had 4,500 captive Saxons massacred for rebelling, [ 14 ] and the Capitulatio de partibus Saxoniae , a law imposed on conquered Saxons in 785, after another rebellion and destruction of churches and killing of missionary priests and monks, [ 15 ] that prescribed death to those who refused to convert to Christianity.

[ 16 ] Forced conversion that occurred after the seventh century generally took place during riots and massacres carried out by mobs and clergy without support of the rulers. In contrast, royal persecutions of Jews from the late eleventh century onward generally took the form of expulsions, with some exceptions, such as conversions of Jews in southern Italy of the 13th century, which were carried out by Dominican Inquisitors but instigated by King Charles II of Naples .

[ 12 ] Jews were forced to convert to Christianity by the Crusaders in Lorraine, on the Lower Rhine, in Bavaria and Bohemia, in Mainz and in Worms [ 17 ] (see Rhineland massacres , Worms massacre (1096) ).

Though he strongly condemned and prohibited forced conversion and baptism by decree, [ 18 ] Pope Innocent III suggested in a private letter to a bishop in 1201 [ 19 ] that those who agreed to be baptized to avoid torture and intimidation might be compelled to outwardly observe Christianity: [ 20 ] [T]hose who are immersed even though reluctant, do belong to ecclesiastical jurisdiction at least by reason of the sacrament, and might therefore be reasonably compelled to observe the rules of the Christian Faith. It is, to be sure, contrary to the Christian Faith that anyone who is unwilling and wholly opposed to it should be compelled to adopt and observe Christianity. For this reason a valid distinction is made by some between kinds of unwilling ones and kinds of compelled ones. Thus one who is drawn to Christianity by violence, through fear and through torture, and receives the sacrament of Baptism in order to avoid loss, he (like one who comes to Baptism in dissimulation) does receive the impress of Christianity, and may be forced to observe the Christian Faith as one who expressed a conditional willingness though, absolutely speaking, he was unwilling ...

During the 12th–13th century Northern Crusades against the pagan Finnic , Baltic , and West Slavic peoples around the Baltic Sea forced conversions were a widely used tactic, which received papal sanction.

[ 21 ] These tactics were first adopted during the Wendish Crusade and became more widespread during the Livonian Crusade and Prussian Crusade , in which tactics included killing hostages, massacre, and devastation of the lands of tribes that had not yet submitted.

[ 22 ] Most of the populations of these regions were converted only after the repeated rebellion of native populations that did not want to accept Christianity even after initial forced conversion; in Old Prussia, the tactics employed in the initial conquest and subsequent conversion of the territory resulted in the death of most of the native population, whose language consequently became extinct.

[ 23 ] Early modern Iberian peninsula [ edit ] Main article: Forced conversions of Muslims in Spain Further information: Morisco , Marrano , and Spanish inquisition After the end of Islamic control of Spain , Jews were expelled from Spain in 1492.

[ 24 ] In Portugal , following an order for their expulsion in 1496, only a handful of them were allowed to leave and the rest of them were forced to convert.

[ 25 ] Muslims were expelled from Portugal in 1497, and they were gradually forced to convert in the constituent kingdoms of Spain. The forced conversion of Muslims was implemented in the Crown of Castile from 1500 to 1502 and it was implemented in the Crown of Aragon in the 1520s.

[ 26 ] After the conversions, the so-called " New Christians " were those inhabitants ( Sephardic Jews or Mudéjar Muslims) who were baptized under coercion as well as in the face of execution, becoming forced converts from Islam ( Moriscos , Conversos and "secret Moors") or converts from Judaism ( Conversos , Crypto-Jews and Marranos ).

After the forced conversions, when all former Muslims and Jews had ostensibly become Catholic, the Spanish and Portuguese Inquisitions primarily targeted forced converts from Judaism and Islam, who came under suspicion, because they were either accused of continuing to adhere to their old religion, or they were accused of falling back into it. Jewish conversos who still resided in Spain and frequently practiced Judaism in secret were suspected of being Crypto-Jews by the "Old Christians". The Spanish Inquisition generated much wealth and income for the church and individual inquisitors by confiscating the property of the persecuted. The end of Al-Andalus and the expulsion of the Sephardic Jews from the Iberian Peninsula went hand in hand with the increasing amount of Spanish and Portuguese influence in the world, influence which was exemplified by the Christian conquest of the aboriginal Indian populations of the Americas. The Ottoman Empire and Morocco absorbed most of the Jewish and Muslim refugees, but a large majority of them remained in Spain and Portugal by choosing to be Conversos.

[ 27 ] European wars of religion [ edit ] See also: European wars of religion A Protestant political cartoon satirising the Dragonnades in France The Peace of Augsburg (1555), signed by Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor , stated that German princes could choose the religion (Lutheranism or Catholicism) of their realms according to their conscience (the principle of cuius regio, eius religio ). .Subjects, citizens, or residents were generally forced to convert to their prince's religion, through a principle called ius reformandi . Those who did not wish to conform to the prince's choice were given a grace period in which they were free to emigrate to different regions in which their desired religion had been accepted. However, serfs were essentially excluded from this right to emigrate.

[ 28 ] After the defeat of the rebellious Protestant Estates of the Kingdom of Bohemia by the Habsburg monarchy at the Battle of White Mountain in 1620, the Habsburgs introduced a Counter-Reformation and forcibly converted all Bohemians, even the Utraquist Hussites, back to the Catholic Church. In 1624, Emperor Ferdinand II issued a patent that allowed only the Catholic religion in Bohemia.

[ 29 ] In the 1620s, Protestant nobility, burghers, and clergy of Bohemia and Austria were expelled from the Habsburg lands or converted to Catholicism, while peasants were forced to adopt the religion of their new Catholic masters.

[ 30 ] The Dragonnades was a policy implemented by Louis XIV in 1681 to force French Protestants known as Huguenots to convert to Catholicism. The dragonnades caused Protestants to flee France, even before the Edict of Fontainebleau of 1685 revoked the religious rights granted them by the Edict of Nantes .

Colonial Americas [ edit ] During the European colonization of the Americas , forced conversion of the continents' indigenous, non-Christian population was common, especially in South America and Mesoamerica , where the conquest of large indigenous polities like the Inca and Aztec Empires placed colonizers in control of large non-Christian populations. According to some South American leaders and indigenous groups, there were cases among native populations of conversion under the threat of violence, often because they were compelled to after being conquered, and that the Catholic Church cooperated with civil authority to achieve this end.

[ 31 ] Russia [ edit ] Upon converting to Christianity in the 10th century, Vladimir the Great , the ruler of Kievan Rus' , ordered Kiev's citizens to undergo a mass baptism in the Dnieper river.

[ 32 ] In the 13th century the pagan populations of the Baltics faced campaigns of forcible conversion by crusading knight corps such as the Livonian Brothers of the Sword and the Teutonic Order , which often meant simply dispossessing these populations of their lands and property.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] After Ivan the Terrible 's conquest of the Khanate of Kazan , the Muslim population faced slaughter, expulsion, forced resettlement and conversion to Christianity.

[ 35 ] In the 18th century, Elizabeth of Russia launched a campaign of forced conversion of Russia's non-Orthodox subjects, including Muslims and Jews.

[ 36 ] Goa Inquisition [ edit ] Main article: Goa Inquisition The Portuguese carried out the Christianisation of Goa in India in the 16th and 17th centuries. The majority of the natives of Goa had converted to Christianity by the end of the 16th century. The Portuguese rulers had implemented state policies encouraging and even rewarding conversions among Hindu subjects. The rapid rise of converts in Goa was mostly the result of Portuguese economic and political control over the Hindus, who were vassals of the Portuguese crown.

[ 37 ] In 1567, the conversion of the majority of the native villagers to Christianity allowed the Portuguese to destroy temples in Bardez , with 300 Hindu temples destroyed. Prohibitions were then declared from December 4, 1567, on public performances of Hindu marriages, sacred thread wearing and cremation. All persons above 15 years of age were compelled to listen to Christian preaching, failing which they were punished. In 1583, Hindu temples at Assolna and Cuncolim were also destroyed by the Portuguese army after the majority of the native villagers there had also converted to Christianity.

[ 38 ] [ verification needed ] "The fathers of the Church forbade the Hindus under terrible penalties the use of their own sacred books, and prevented them from all exercise of their religion. They destroyed their temples, and so harassed and interfered with the people that they abandoned the city in large numbers, refusing to remain any longer in a place where they had no liberty, and were liable to imprisonment, torture and death if they worshiped after their own fashion the gods of their fathers", wrote Filippo Sassetti , who was in India from 1578 to 1588.

[ 39 ] Papal States [ edit ] Main article: Papal States under Pope Pius IX § Protestants and Jews In 1858, Edgardo Mortara was taken from his Jewish parents and raised as a Catholic, because he had been baptized by a maid without his parents' consent or knowledge. This incident was called the Mortara case .

Serbs during World War II in Yugoslavia [ edit ] During World War II in Yugoslavia , Orthodox Serbs were forcibly converted to Catholicism by the Ustashe .

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] Hinduism [ edit ] Indian Christians have alleged that Hindu groups in southern Chhattisgarh have forced Christian converts from Hinduism to revert back to Hinduism.

[ 42 ] Hindu nationalist groups at Agra, Uttar Pradesh , have reportedly used allurements to convert poor Muslims and Christians to Hinduism against their will.

[ 43 ] Apart from the incidents above, there are other reports of forced conversions of Christians and Muslims in India to Hinduism . Some of them were converted under duress or against their will, specifically through the Ghar Wapsi ("returning home") scheme by Hindu extremists , such as Shiv Sena , the VHP & also by the political party of the BJP .

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] In 2014, Cardinal Baselios Cleemis protested the "forced conversions" to Hinduism, that happened through the Ghar Wapsi ("homecoming") scheme, in Uttar Pradesh (UP) , Gujarat & Kerala .

[ 52 ] The Shiv Sena has said that India or Hindustan is not the homeland of Muslims and Christians.

[ 53 ] Some Hindu extremist groups like the Hindu Mahasabha , have called for mass killings of Christians [ 54 ] [ 55 ] & also particularly for the massacres or forced sterilisations of Muslims.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] [ 58 ] Islam [ edit ] See also: History of Islam , Spread of Islam , Takfiri , Apostasy in Islam § Punishment , Persecution of non-Muslims , Takfir , Islamic Statism , Islamic State , Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan (1996–2001) , Taliban , Boko Haram , Al-Shabaab (militant group) , Kafir , Yazidi genocide , Persecution of Christians by the Islamic State , and Coerced religious conversion in Pakistan § Notable incidents Against Christians [ edit ] After the Arab conquests, a number of Christian Arab tribes suffered enslavement and forced conversion.

[ 59 ] The Teaching of Jacob (written soon after the death of Muhammad), is one of the earliest records on Islam and "implies that Muslims tried, on threat of death to make Christians abjure Christianity and accept Islam.” [ 60 ] Jizya and conversion [ edit ] Non-Muslims were required to pay the jizya while pagans were either required to accept Islam, pay the jizya, be exiled, or be killed, depending on which of the four main schools of Islamic law their conqueror followed.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] Some historians believe that forced conversion was rare in early Islamic history, [ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] and most conversions to Islam were voluntary.

[ 65 ] Muslim rulers were often more interested in conquest than conversion.

[ 65 ] Ira Lapidus points towards "interwoven terms of political and economic benefits and of a sophisticated culture and religion" as appealing to the masses. He writes that: The question of why people convert to Islam has always generated the intense feeling. Earlier generations of European scholars believed that conversions to Islam were made at the point of the sword, and that conquered peoples were given the choice of conversion or death. It is now apparent that conversion by force, while not unknown in Muslim countries, was, in fact, rare. Muslim conquerors ordinarily wished to dominate rather than convert, and most conversions to Islam were voluntary. (...) In most cases, worldly and spiritual motives for conversion blended together. Moreover, conversion to Islam did not necessarily imply a complete turning from an old to a totally new life. While it entailed the acceptance of new religious beliefs and membership in a new religious community, most converts retained a deep attachment to the cultures and communities from which they came.

[ 66 ] Muslim scholars like Abu Hanifa and Abu Yusuf stated that the jizya tax should be paid by Non-Muslims ( Kuffar ) regardless of their religion, some later and also earlier Muslim jurists did not permit Non-Muslims who are not People of the Book or Ahle-Kitab (Jews, Christians, Sabians) pay the jizya . Instead, they only allowed them (non- Ahle-Kitab ) to avoid death by choosing to convert to Islam.

[ 67 ] Of the four schools of Islamic jurisprudence , the Hanafi and Maliki schools allow polytheists to be granted dhimmi status, except Arab polytheists . However, the Shafi'i , Hanbali and Zahiri schools only consider Christians , Jews , and Sabians to be eligible to belong to the dhimmi category.

[ 68 ] Wael Hallaq states that in theory, Islamic religious tolerance only applied to those religious groups that Islamic jurisprudence considered to be monotheistic "People of the Book", i.e. Christians, Jews, and Sabians if they paid the jizya tax, while to those excluded from the "People of the Book" were only offered two choices: convert to Islam or fight to the death. In practice, the "People of the Book" designation and dhimmi status were even extended to the non-monotheistic religions of the conquered peoples, such as Hindus , Jains , Buddhists , and other non-monotheists.

[ 69 ] Druze [ edit ] The Druze have frequently experienced persecution by different Muslim regimes such as the Shia Ismaili Fatimid State , [ 70 ] Mamluk , [ 71 ] Sunni Ottoman Empire , [ 72 ] and Egypt Eyalet .

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] The persecution of the Druze included massacres , demolishing Druze prayer houses and holy places and forced conversion to Islam.

[ 75 ] Those were no ordinary killings and massacres in the Druze's narrative, they were meant to eradicate the whole community according to the Druze narrative.

[ 76 ] Early period [ edit ] Main article: Early history of Islam Further information: Early Muslim conquests and Spread of Islam The wars of the Ridda (lit.

apostasy ) undertaken by Abu Bakr , the first caliph of the Rashidun Caliphate , against Arab tribes who had accepted Islam but refused to pay Zakat and Jizya Tax, have been described by some historians as an instance of forced conversion [ 77 ] or "reconversion".

[ 78 ] The rebellion of these Arab tribes was less a relapse to the pre-Islamic Arabian religion than termination of a political contract they had made with Muhammad .

[ 78 ] Some of these tribal leaders claimed prophethood, bringing themselves in direct conflict with the Muslim Caliphate.

[ 79 ] Two out of the four schools of Islamic law, i.e. Hanafi and Maliki schools, accepted non-Arab polytheists to be eligible for the dhimmi status. Under this doctrine, Arab polytheists were forced to choose between conversion and death. However, according to perception of most Muslim jurists, all Arabs had embraced Islam during the lifetime of Muhammad. Their exclusion therefore had little practical significance after his death in 632.

[ 68 ] Arab historian Al-Baladhuri says that Caliph Umar deported Christians who refused to apostatize and convert to Islam, and that he obeyed the order of the prophet who advised: “there shall not remain two religions in the land of Arabia.” [ 80 ] In the 9th century, the Samaritan population of Palestine faced persecution and attempts at forced conversion at the hands of the rebel leader ibn Firāsa, against whom they were defended by Abbasid caliphal troops.

[ 81 ] Historians recognize that during the Early Middle Ages , the Christian populations living in the lands invaded by the Arab Muslim armies between the 7th and 10th centuries suffered religious discrimination , religious persecution , religious violence , and martyrdom multiple times at the hands of Arab Muslim officials and rulers.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] As People of the Book , Christians under Muslim rule were subjected to dhimmi status (along with Jews , Samaritans , Gnostics , Mandeans , and Zoroastrians ), which was inferior to the status of Muslims.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] Christians and other religious minorities thus faced religious discrimination and religious persecution in that they were banned from proselytising (for Christians, it was forbidden to evangelize or spread Christianity ) in the lands invaded by the Arab Muslims on pain of death, they were banned from bearing arms, undertaking certain professions, and were obligated to dress differently in order to distinguish themselves from Arabs.

[ 84 ] Under sharia , Non-Muslims were obligated to pay jizya and kharaj taxes, [ 83 ] [ 84 ] together with periodic heavy ransom levied upon Christian communities by Muslim rulers in order to fund military campaigns, all of which contributed a significant proportion of income to the Islamic states while conversely reducing many Christians to poverty, and these financial and social hardships forced many Christians to convert to Islam.

[ 84 ] Christians unable to pay these taxes were forced to surrender their children to the Muslim rulers as payment who would sell them as slaves to Muslim households where they were forced to convert to Islam .

[ 84 ] Many Christian martyrs were executed under the Islamic death penalty for defending their Christian faith through dramatic acts of resistance such as refusing to convert to Islam, repudiation of the Islamic religion and subsequent reconversion to Christianity , and blasphemy towards Muslim beliefs .

[ 82 ] Umayyad Caliphate [ edit ] After the Arab conquests a number of Christian Arab tribes suffered enslavement and forced conversion.

[ 59 ] During the rise of the Islamic Caliphates, it was increasingly expected for all Arabs to be Muslims and pressure was put on many to convert.

[ 85 ] The Umayyad Caliph Al-Walid I said to Shamala, the Christian Arab leader of the Banu Taghlib : "As you are a chief of the Arabs you shame them all by worshipping the cross; obey my wish and turn Muslim." He replied, 'How so? I am chief of Taghlib, and I fear lest I become a cause of destruction to them all if I and they cease to believe in christ" Enraged Al-Walid had him dragged away on his face and tortured; afterward he commanded him again to convert to Islam or else prepare to "eat his own flesh." The Christian Arab again refused, and the order was carried out: Walid's servants "cut off a slice from Shamala's thigh and roasted it in the fire, and they thrust it into his mouth" and he was blinded during this as well. This event is confirmed by the Muslim historian Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani [ 86 ] [ 87 ] [ 88 ] In the early eighth century under the Umayyads, 63 out of a group of 70 Christian pilgrims from Iconium were captured, tortured, and executed under the orders of the Arab Governor of Ceaserea for refusing to convert to Islam (seven were forcibly converted to Islam under torture). Soon afterwards, sixty more Christian pilgrims from Amorium were crucified in Jerusalem.

[ 89 ] Almohad Caliphate [ edit ] Main articles: Spain in the Middle Ages and Slavery in the Almohad Caliphate There were forced conversions in the 12th century under the Almohad dynasty of North Africa and al-Andalus , who suppressed the dhimmi status of Jews and Christians and gave them the choice between conversion, exile, and being executed. The treatment and persecution of Jews under Almohad rule was a drastic change.

[ 90 ] Prior to Almohad rule during the Caliphate of Córdoba , Jewish culture experienced a Golden Age .

María Rosa Menocal , a specialist in Iberian literature at Yale University , has argued that "tolerance was an inherent aspect of Andalusian society", and that the Jewish dhimmi s living under the Caliphate, while allowed fewer rights than Muslims, were still better off than in Christian Europe .

[ 91 ] Many Jews migrated to al-Andalus , where they were not just tolerated but allowed to practice their faith openly. Christians had also practiced their religion openly in Córdoba, and both Jews and Christians lived openly in Morocco as well.

The first Almohad ruler, Abd al-Mumin, allowed an initial seven-month grace period .

[ 92 ] Then he forced most of the urban dhimmi population in Morocco, both Jewish and Christian, to convert to Islam.

[ 93 ] In 1198, the Almohad emir Abu Yusuf Yaqub al-Mansur decreed that Jews must wear a dark blue garb, with very large sleeves and a grotesquely oversized hat; [ 94 ] his son altered the colour to yellow , a change that may have influenced Catholic ordinances some time later.

[ 94 ] Those who converted had to wear clothing that identified them as Jews since they were not regarded as sincere Muslims.

[ 93 ] Cases of mass martyrdom of Jews who refused to convert to Islam are recorded.

[ 92 ] Many of the conversions were superficial.

Maimonides urged Jews to choose the superficial conversion over martyrdom and argued, "Muslims know very well that we do not mean what we say, and that what we say is only to escape the ruler's punishment and to satisfy him with this simple confession." [ 90 ] [ 93 ] Abraham Ibn Ezra (1089–1164), who himself fled the persecutions of the Almohads, composed an elegy mourning the destruction of many Jewish communities throughout Spain and the Maghreb under the Almohads.

[ 90 ] [ 95 ] Many Jews fled from territories ruled by the Almohads to Christian lands, and others, like the family of Maimonides, fled east to more tolerant Muslim lands.

[ 96 ] However, a few Jewish traders still working in North Africa are recorded.

[ 92 ] The treatment and persecution of Christians under Almohad rule was a drastic change as well.

[ 97 ] Many Christians were killed, forced to convert, or forced to flee. Some Christians fled to the Christian kingdoms in the north and west and helped fuel the Reconquista .

Christians under the Almohad rule generally chose to relocate to the Christian principalities (most notably the Kingdom of Asturias ) in the north of the Iberian Peninsula , whereas Jews decided to stay in order to keep their properties, and many of them feigned conversion to Islam, while continuing to believe and practice Judaism in secrecy .

[ 98 ] During the Almohad persecution, the medieval Jewish philosopher and rabbi Moses Maimonides (1135–1204), one of the leading exponents of the Golden Age of Jewish culture in the Iberian Peninsula , wrote his Epistle on Apostasy , in which he permitted Jews to feign apostasy under duress, though strongly recommending leaving the country instead.

[ 99 ] There is dispute amongst scholars as to whether Maimonides himself converted to Islam in order to freely escape from Almohad territory, and then reconverted back to Judaism in either the Levant or in Egypt .

[ 100 ] He was later denounced as an apostate and tried in an Islamic court.

[ 101 ] Seljuk Empire [ edit ] In order to increase their numbers in Anatolia, the newly arrived Seljuk Turks took Christian children and forcibly converted them to Islam and turkified them, acts specifically mentioned in Antioch , around Samosata , and in western Asia Minor.

[ 102 ] Danishmend's campaigns [ edit ] During his campaigns, Sultan Malik Danishmend swore to forcibly convert the population of the city of Sisiya Comana to Islam and he did so upon capturing it. The governor of Comana forced its population to pray 5 times a day and those who refused to go to the mosque were brought to it by threat of physical violence. Those who continued to drink wine or do other things that Islam forbids were publicly whipped. The fate of the city of Euchaita was similar, with Malik giving the people the option of converting to Islam or death.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] Yemen [ edit ] In the late 1160s, the Yemenite ruler 'Abd-al-Nabī ibn Mahdi left Jews with the choice between conversion to Islam or martyrdom .

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] Ibn Mahdi also imposed his beliefs upon the Muslims besides the Jews. This led to a revival of Jewish messianism , but also led to mass-conversion.

[ 106 ] The persecution ended in 1173 with the defeat of Ibn Mahdi and conquest of Yemen by the brother of Saladin , and they were allowed to return to their Jewish faith.

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] According to two Cairo Genizah documents, the Ayyubid ruler of Yemen, al-Malik al-Mu'izz al-Ismail (reigned from 1197 to 1202) had attempted to force the Jews of Aden to convert. The second document details the relief of Jewish community after his murder, and those who had been forced to convert reverted to Judaism.

[ 108 ] While he did not impose Islam upon the foreign merchants, they were forced to pay triple the normal rate of poll tax.

[ 106 ] A measure listed in the legal works by Al-Shawkānī is of forced conversion of Jewish orphans. No date is given for this decree by modern studies nor who issued it.

[ 109 ] The forced conversion of Jewish orphans was reintroduced under Imam Yahya in 1922. The Orphans' Decree was implemented aggressively for the first ten years. It was re-promulgated in 1928.

[ 110 ] Ottoman Empire [ edit ] Registration of boys for the devşirme .

Ottoman miniature painting from the Süleymanname , 1558.

Main article: Devşirme See also: Christianity in the Ottoman Empire § Conversion , and slavery in the Ottoman Empire A form of forced conversion became institutionalized during the Ottoman Empire in the practice of devşirme , [ 111 ] a human levy in which Christian boys were seized and collected from their families (usually in the Balkans ), enslaved , forcefully converted to Islam, and then trained as elite military unit within the Ottoman army or for high-ranking service to the sultan.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] From the mid to late 14th, through early 18th centuries, the devşirme – janissary system enslaved an estimated 500,000 to one million non-Muslim adolescent males.

[ 113 ] These boys would attain a great education and high social standing after their training and conversion.

[ 114 ] In the 17th century, Sabbatai Zevi , a Sephardic Jew whose ancestors were welcomed in the Ottoman Empire during the Spanish Inquisition , proclaimed himself as the Jewish Messiah and called for the abolition of major Jewish laws and customs. After he attracted a large following , he was arrested by the Ottoman authorities and given a choice between execution or conversion to Islam.

[ 115 ] Zevi opted for a feigned conversion solely to escape the death penalty, [ 115 ] and continued to believe and practice Judaism along with his followers in secrecy.

[ 115 ] [ 116 ] [ 117 ] The Byzantine historian Doukas recounts two other cases of forced or attempted forced conversion: one of a Christian official who had offended Sultan Murad II , and the other of an archbishop.

[ 118 ] Speros Vryonis cites a pastoral letter from 1338 addressed to the residents of Nicaea indicating widespread, forcible conversion by the Turks after it was conquered: "And they [Turks] having captured and enslaved many of our own and violently forced them and dragging them along alas! So that they took up their evil and godlessness." [ 119 ] After the Siege of Nicaea (1328–1331) The Turks began to force the Christian inhabitants who had escaped the massacres to convert to Islam. The patriarch of Constantinople John XIX wrote a message to the people of Nicea shortly after the city was seized. His letter says that "The invaders endeavored to impose their impure religion on the populace, at all costs, intending to make the inhabitants followers of Muhammad". Patriarch advised the Christians to "be steadfast in your religion" and not to forget that the "Turks are masters of your bodies only, but not of your souls.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] [ 122 ] Apostolos Vakalopoulos comments on the first Ottoman invasions of Europe and Dimitar Angelov gives assessment on the Campaigns on Murad II and Mehmed II and their impact on the conquered native Balkan Christians: [ 123 ] From the very beginning of the Turkish onslaught [in Thrace] under Suleiman [son of Sultan Orhan ], the Turks tried to consolidate their position by the forcible imposition of Islam. If [the Ottoman historian] Şükrullah is to be believed, those who refused to accept the Moslem faith were slaughtered and their families enslaved . "Where there were bells," writes the same author [Şükrullah], "Suleiman broke them up and cast them into fires. Where there were churches he destroyed them or converted them into mosques. Thus, in place of bells there were now muezzins. Wherever Christian infidels were still found, vassalage was imposed on their rulers. At least in public they could no longer say 'kyrie eleison' but rather 'There is no God but Allah'; and where once their prayers had been addressed to Christ, they were now to "Muhammad, the prophet of Allah." According to historian Demetrios Constantelos , "Mass forced conversions were recorded during the caliphates of Selim I (1512–1520),...Selim II (1566–1574), and Murat III (1574–1595). On the occasion of some anniversary, such as the capture of a city, or a national holiday, many rayahs were forced to apostacize. On the day of the circumcision of Mehmed III , great numbers of Christians (Albanians, Greeks, Slavs) were forced to convert to Islam." [ 124 ] [ 125 ] After reviewing the martyrology of Christians killed by the Ottomans from the fall of Constantinople all the way to the final phases of the Greek War of Independence, Constantelos reports: [ 125 ] The Ottoman Turks condemned to death eleven Ecumenical Patriarchs of Constantinople, nearly one hundred bishops, and several thousand priests, deacons, and monks. It is impossible to say with certainty how many men of the cloth were forced to apostasize.

For strategic reasons, the Ottomans forcibly converted Christians living in the frontier regions of Macedonia and northern Bulgaria, particularly in the 16th and 17th centuries. Those who refused were either executed or burned alive.

[ 126 ] The community budgets of Jews was heavily burdened by the repurchasing of Jewish slaves abducted by Arab, Berber, or Turkish pirates, or by military raids. The mental trauma due to captivity and slavery caused unransomed prisoners who had lost family, money, and friends to convert to Islam.

[ 127 ] During his travels through the Salt lake region of central Anatolia, Jean-Baptiste Tavernier observed in the town of Mucur , "there are numbers of Greeks who are forced everyday to become Turks".

[ 128 ] [ page needed ] During the genocide and persecution of Greeks in the 20th century , there were cases of forced conversion to Islam [ 129 ] (see also Armenian genocide , Assyrian genocide , and Hamidian massacres ).

Iran [ edit ] See also: Safavid conversion of Iran from Sunnism to Shiism Ismail I , the founder of the Safavid dynasty, decreed Twelver Shiism to be the official religion of state and ordered executions of a number of Sunni intellectuals who refused to accept Shiism.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] Non-Muslims faced frequent persecutions and at times forced conversions under the rule of his dynastic successors.

[ 132 ] Thus, after the capture of the Hormuz Island , Abbas I required local Christians to convert to Twelver Shia Islam, Abbas II granted his ministers authority to force Jews to become Shia Muslims, and Sultan Husayn decreed forcible conversion of Zoroastrians.

[ 133 ] In 1839, during the Qajar era the Jewish community in the city of Mashhad was attacked by a mob and subsequently forced to convert to Shia Islam.

[ 134 ] In Persia, instances of forced conversion of Jews took place in 1291 and 1318, and those in Baghdad in 1333 and 1344. In 1617 and 1622, a wave of forced conversions and persecution, provoked by the slander of Jewish apostates, swept over the Jews of Persia, sparing neither Nestorian Christians nor Armenians. From 1653 to 1666, during the reign of Shah Abbas II, all the Jews in Persia were Islamized by force. However, religious freedom was eventually restored. A law in 1656 gave Jewish or Christian converts to Islam exclusive rights of inheritance. This law was alleviated for the Christians as a concession to Pope Alexander VII but remained in force for Jews until the end of the nineteenth century.

David Cazés mentions the existence in Tunisia of similar inheritance laws favoring converts to Islam.

[ 127 ] Indian Subcontinent [ edit ] In an invasion of the Kashmir valley (1015), Mahmud of Ghazni plundered the valley, took many prisoners and carried out conversions to Islam.

[ 135 ] In his later campaigns, in Mathura, Baran and Kanauj, again, many conversions took place. Those soldiers who surrendered to him were converted to Islam. In Baran (Bulandshahr) alone 10,000 persons were converted to Islam including the king.

[ 136 ] Tarikh-i-Yamini, Rausat-us-Safa and Tarikh-i-Ferishtah speak of construction of mosques and schools and appointment of preachers and teachers by Mahmud and his successor Masud. Wherever Mahmud went, he insisted on the people to convert to Islam.

[ 137 ] The raids by Muhammad Ghori and his generals brought in thousands of slaves in the late 12th century, most of whom were compelled to convert as one of the preconditions of their freedom.

[ 137 ] [ 138 ] [ 139 ] [ 140 ] Sikandar Butshikan (1394–1417) demolished Hindu temples and forcefully converted Hindus.

[ 141 ] Aurangzeb employed a number of means to encourage conversions to Islam.

[ 142 ] The ninth guru of Sikhs, Guru Tegh Bahadur , was beheaded in Delhi on orders of Aurangzeb for refusing to convert to Islam.

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] In a Mughal-Sikh war in 1715, 700 followers of Banda Singh Bahadur were beheaded.

[ 145 ] Sikhs were executed for not apostatizing from Sikhism.

[ 146 ] Banda Singh Bahadur was offered a pardon if he converted to Islam.

[ 147 ] Upon refusal, he was tortured, [ 148 ] [ 149 ] and was killed with his five-year-old son.

[ 146 ] Following the execution of Banda, the emperor ordered to apprehend Sikhs anywhere they were found.

[ 147 ] 18th century ruler Tipu Sultan persecuted the Hindus, Christians and Mappila Muslims .

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] During Sultan's Mysorean invasion of Kerala , hundreds of temples and churches were demolished and ten thousands of Christians and Hindus were killed or converted to Islam by force.

[ 152 ] [ 153 ] Contemporary period [ edit ] South Asia [ edit ] Bangladesh [ edit ] In Bangladesh , the International Crimes Tribunal tried and convicted several leaders of the Islamic Razakar militias, as well as Bangladesh Muslim Awami league (Forid Uddin Mausood), of war crimes committed against Hindus during the 1971 Bangladesh genocide . The charges included forced conversion of Bengali Hindus to Islam.

[ 154 ] [ 155 ] [ 156 ] India [ edit ] In the 1998 Prankote massacre , 26 Kashmiri Hindus were beheaded by Islamist militants after their refusal to convert to Islam. The militants struck when the villagers refused demands from the gunmen to convert to Islam and prove their conversion by eating beef.

[ 157 ] During the Noakhali riots in 1946, several thousand Hindus were forcibly converted to Islam by Muslim mobs.

[ 158 ] [ 159 ] Pakistan [ edit ] Main article: Religious discrimination in Pakistan Members of minority religions in Pakistan face discrimination every day. This leads to socio-political and economic exclusion and severe marginalization in all aspects of life. In a country that is 96 percent Muslim, targeting of its religious minorities (3 percent), especially Shias, Ahmadis, Hindus and Christians, is widespread.

[ 160 ] See also: Freedom of religion in Pakistan , Human rights in Pakistan , Minorities in Pakistan , Persecution of Christians in Pakistan , Persecution of Hindus in Pakistan , Forced conversions in Pakistan , and Forced conversion of minority girls in Pakistan The rise of Taliban insurgency in Pakistan has been an influential and increasing factor in the persecution of and discrimination against religious minorities , such as Hindus , Christians , Sikhs , and other minorities.

[ 161 ] The Human Rights Council of Pakistan has reported that cases of forced conversion are increasing.

[ 162 ] [ 163 ] A 2014 report by the Movement for Solidarity and Peace (MSP) says about 1,000 women in Pakistan are forcibly converted to Islam every year (700 Christian and 300 Hindu).

[ 164 ] [ 165 ] [ 166 ] In 2003, a six-year-old Sikh girl was kidnapped by a member of the Afridi tribe in Northwest Frontier Province; the alleged kidnapper claimed the girl was actually 12 years old, had converted to Islam, and therefore could not be returned to her non-Muslim family.

[ 167 ] In Pakistan's Sindh province, a distressing pattern of crimes has emerged, including the abduction, coerced conversion to Islam, and subsequent marriage to older Muslim men who are often abductors. These crimes primarily target underage girls from impoverished Hindu families.

[ 168 ] Rinkle Kumari, a 19-year Pakistani student, Lata Kumari, and Asha Kumari, a Hindu working in a beauty parlor, were allegedly forced to convert from Hinduism to Islam.

[ 169 ] They told the judge that they wanted to go with their parents.

[ 170 ] Their cases were appealed all the way to the Supreme Court of Pakistan . The appeal was admitted but remained unheard ever after.

[ 171 ] Rinkle was abducted by a gang and "forced" to convert to Islam, before being head shaved.

[ 172 ] Sikhs in Hangu district stated they were being pressured to convert to Islam by Yaqoob Khan, the assistant commissioner of Tall Tehsil , in December 2017. However, the Deputy Commissioner of Hangu Shahid Mehmood denied it occurred and claimed that Sikhs were offended during a conversation with Yaqub though it was not intentional.

[ 173 ] [ 174 ] [ 175 ] [ 176 ] Many Hindu girls living in Pakistan are kidnapped, forcibly converted and married to Muslims.

[ 177 ] According to another report from the Movement for Solidarity and Peace, about 1,000 non-Muslim girls are converted to Islam each year in Pakistan.

[ 178 ] According to the Amarnath Motumal, the vice chairperson of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan , every month, an estimated 20 or more Hindu girls are abducted and converted, although exact figures are impossible to gather.

[ 179 ] In 2014 alone, 265 legal cases of forced conversion were reported mostly involving Hindu girls.

[ 180 ] A total of 57 Hindus converted in Pasrur during May 14–19. On May 14, 35 Hindus of the same family were forced to convert by their employer because his sales dropped after Muslims started boycotting his eatable items as they were prepared by Hindus as well as their persecution by the Muslim employees of neighbouring shops according to their relatives. Since the impoverished Hindu had no other way to earn and needed to keep the job to survive, they converted. 14 members of another family converted on May 17 since no one was employing them, later another Hindu man and his family of eight under pressure from Muslims to avoid their land being grabbed.

[ 181 ] In 2017, the Sikh community in Hangu district of Pakistan's Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa province alleged that they were "being forced to convert to Islam" by a government official. Farid Chand Singh, who filed the complaint, has claimed that Assistant Commissioner Tehsil Tall Yaqoob Khan was allegedly forcing Sikhs to convert to Islam and the residents of Doaba area are being tortured religiously.

[ 182 ] [ 183 ] According to reports, about 60 Sikhs of Doaba had demanded security from the administration.

[ 184 ] Many Hindus voluntarily convert to Islam in order to acquire Watan Cards and National Identification Cards. These converts are also given land and money. For example, 428 poor Hindus in Matli were converted between 2009 and 2011 by the Madrassa Baitul Islam, a Deobandi seminary in Matli, which pays off the debts of Hindus converting to Islam.

[ 185 ] Another example is the conversion of 250 Hindus to Islam in Chohar Jamali area in Thatta .

[ 186 ] Conversions are also carried out by Ex Hindu Baba Deen Mohammad Shaikh mission which converted 108,000 people to Islam since 1989.

[ 187 ] Within Pakistan, the southern province of Sindh had over 1,000 forced conversions of Christian and Hindu girls according to the annual report of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan in 2018. According to victims' families and activists, Mian Abdul Haq , who is a local political and religious leader in Sindh, has been accused of being responsible for forced conversions of girls within the province.

[ 188 ] More than 100 Hindus in Sindh converted to Islam in June 2020 to escape discrimination and economic pressures. Islamic charities and clerics offer incentives of jobs or land to impoverished minorities on the condition that they convert.

New York Times summarised the view of Hindu groups that these seemingly voluntary conversions "take place under such economic duress that they are tantamount to a forced conversion anyway." [ 189 ] In October 2020, the Pakistani High Court upheld the validity of a forced marriage between 44-year-old Ali Azhar and 13-year-old Christian Arzoo Raja. Raja was abducted by Azhar, forcibly wed to Azhar and then forcibly converted to Islam by Azhar.

[ 190 ] The ruling was overturned a month later, and Raja was returned to her home, with Azhar arrested.

[ 191 ] Pakistan has been found in breach of its international commitments to safeguard non-Muslim girls from exploitation by influential factions and criminal elements, as forced conversions have become commonplace within the nation. This concerning trend is on the rise, notably observed in the districts of Tharparkar, Umerkot, and Mirpur Khas in Sindh.

[ 192 ] Indonesia [ edit ] In 2012, over 1000 Catholic children in East Timor , removed from their families, were reported to being held in Indonesia without consent of their parents, forcibly converted to Islam, educated in Islamic schools and naturalized.

[ 193 ] Other reports claim forced conversion of minority Ahmadiyya sect Muslims to Sunni Islam, with the use of violence.

[ 194 ] [ 195 ] [ 196 ] In 2001 the Indonesian army evacuated hundreds of Christian refugees from the remote Kesui and Teor islands in Maluku after the refugees stated that they had been forced to convert to Islam. According to reports, some of the men had been circumcised against their will , and a paramilitary group involved in the incident confirmed that circumcisions had taken place while denying any element of coercion.

[ 197 ] In 2017, many members of the Orang Rimba tribe, especially children, were being forced to renounce their folk religion and convert to Islam.

[ 198 ] West Asia [ edit ] Further information: Genocide of Yazidis by ISIL , Persecution of Yazidis by Muslims , Persecution of Christians by ISIL , Persecution of Shias by ISIL , 2015 kidnapping and beheading of Copts in Libya , and Abduction and forced conversion of Coptic women There have been a number of reports of attempts to forcibly convert religious minorities in Iraq . The Yazidi people of northern Iraq, who follow an ethnoreligious syncretic faith, have been threatened with forced conversion by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant , who consider their practices to be Satanism .

[ 199 ] UN investigators have reported mass killings of Yazidi men and boys who refused to convert to Islam.

[ 200 ] In Baghdad, hundreds of Assyrian Christians fled their homes in 2007 when a local extremist group announced that they had to convert to Islam, pay the jizya or die.

[ 201 ] In March 2007, the BBC reported that people in the Mandaean ethnic and religious minority in Iraq alleged that they were being targeted by Islamist insurgents, who offered them the choice of conversion or death.

[ 202 ] In 2006, two journalists of the Fox News Network were kidnapped at gunpoint in the Gaza Strip by a previously unknown militant group. After being forced to read statements on videotape proclaiming that they had converted to Islam, they were released by their captors.

[ 203 ] Allegations of Coptic Christian girls being forced to marry Arab Muslim men and convert to Islam in Egypt have been reported by a number of news and advocacy organizations [ 204 ] [ 205 ] [ 206 ] and have sparked public protests.

[ 207 ] According to a 2009 report by the US State Department, observers have found it extremely difficult to determine whether compulsion was used, and in recent years no such cases have been independently verified.

[ 208 ] Coptic women and girls are abducted, forced to convert to Islam and marry Muslim men.

[ 209 ] In 2009, the Washington, D.C.–based group Christian Solidarity International published a study of the abductions and forced marriages and the anguish felt by the young women because returning to Christianity is against the law. Further allegations of organised abduction of Copts, trafficking and police collusion continue in 2017.

[ 210 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] See also: Grooming gang and Child sexual abuse in the United Kingdom According to the UK prison officers' union, some Muslim prisoners in the UK have been forcibly converting fellow inmates to Islam in prisons.

[ 211 ] An independent government report published in 2023 found that there have been multiple cases of Muslim gangs threatening non-Muslim prisoners to "convert or get hurt".

[ 212 ] In 2007, a Sikh girl's family claimed that she had been forcibly converted to Islam, and they received a police guard after being attacked by an armed gang, although the "Police said no one was injured in the incident".

[ 213 ] In response to these news stories, an open letter to Sir Ian Blair, signed by ten Hindu academics, argued that claims that Hindu and Sikh girls were being forcefully converted were "part of an arsenal of myths propagated by right-wing Hindu supremacist organisations in India".

[ 214 ] The Muslim Council of Britain issued a press release pointing out there is a "lack of evidence" of any forced conversions and suggested it is an underhand attempt to smear the British Muslim population.

[ 215 ] An academic paper by Katy Sian published in the journal South Asian Popular Culture in 2011 explored the question of how "'forced' conversion narratives" arose around the Sikh diaspora in the United Kingdom .

[ 216 ] Sian, who reports that claims of conversion through courtship on campuses are widespread in the UK, indicates that rather than relying on actual evidence they primarily rest on the word of "a friend of a friend" or on personal anecdote . According to Sian, the narrative is similar to accusations of " white slavery " lodged against the Jewish community and foreigners to the UK and the US, with the former having ties to antisemitism that mirror the Islamophobia betrayed by the modern narrative. Sian expanded on these views in 2013's Mistaken Identities, Forced Conversions, and Postcolonial Formations .

[ 217 ] In 2018, a report by a Sikh activist organisation, Sikh Youth UK, entitled "The Religiously Aggravated Sexual Exploitation of Young Sikh Women Across the UK" made allegations of similarities between the case of Sikh Women and the Rotherham child sexual exploitation scandal.

[ 218 ] However, in 2019, this report was criticised by researchers and an official UK government report led by two Sikh academics for false and misleading information.

[ 219 ] [ 220 ] It noted: "The RASE report lacks solid data, methodological transparency and rigour. It is filled instead with sweeping generalisations and poorly substantiated claims around the nature and scale of abuse of Sikh girls and causal factors driving it. It appealed heavily to historical tensions between Sikhs and Muslims and narratives of honour in a way that seemed designed to whip up fear and hate".

[ 220 ] Judaism [ edit ] Under the Hasmonean Kingdom , the Idumeans were forced to convert to Judaism, by threat of exile or death, depending on the source.

[ 221 ] [ 222 ] In Eusebíus, Christianity, and Judaism , Harold W. Attridge claims that Josephus ' account was accurate and that Alexander Jannaeus (around 80 BCE) demolished the city of Pella in Moab , because the inhabitants refused to adopt Jewish national customs.

[ 223 ] Maurice Sartre writes of the "policy of forced Judaization adopted by Hyrcanos , Aristobulus I and Jannaeus ", who offered "the conquered peoples a choice between expulsion or conversion," [ 224 ] William Horbury postulates that an existing small Jewish population in Lower Galilee was massively expanded by forced conversion around 104 BCE.

[ 225 ] Yigal Levin, conversely, argues that many non-Jewish communities, such as Idumeans , voluntarily assimilated in Hasmonean Judea, based on archaeological evidence and cultural affinities between the groups.

[ 226 ] In 2009, the BBC claimed that in 524 CE the Himyarite Kingdom , who had adopted Judaism as the de facto state religion two centuries earlier, led by King Yusuf Dhu Nuwas , had offered residents of a village in what is now Saudi Arabia the choice between conversion to Judaism or death, and that 20,000 Christians had then been massacred.

[ 227 ] During the reign of Dhu Nuwas, a political-power transferring process began and during it, the Himyarite kingdom became a tributary of the Kingdom of Aksum , which had adopted Christianity as its de facto state religion two centuries earlier. This process was completed by the time of the reign of Ma'dīkarib Yafur (519-522), a Christian who was appointed by the Aksumites. A coup d'état ensued, with Dhu Nuwas assuming authority after the killing of the Aksumite garrison in Zafar . A general was sent against Najrān , a predominantly Christian oasis, with a good number of Jews, who refused to recognize his authority. The general blocked the caravan route which connected Najrān with Eastern Arabia and he also persecuted the Christian population of Najrān.

[ 228 ] [ 229 ] [ 230 ] Dhu Nuwas campaign eventually killed between 11,500 and 14,000, and took a similar number of prisoners.

[ 231 ] Ethiopian Jews (also known as Beta Israel ) were forcibly converted to mainstream Rabbinical Judaism following their covert evacuation to Israel during Operation Moses and Operation Solomon . Their native form of Judaism, commonly called Haymanot , is looked down upon by the Israeli government and the Chief Rabbinate of Israel .

[ 232 ] [ 233 ] Other instances of forced conversion to Judaism are unknown.

[ 234 ] Forced conversion has been forbidden for over 1000 years and forced conversions are considered invalid.

[ 235 ] Atheism [ edit ] " St. Theodora Church in downtown Chişinău was converted into the city's Museum of Scientific Atheism".

— Andrei Brezianu [ 236 ] Eastern Bloc [ edit ] Main article: Soviet anti-religious legislation Further information: Persecution of Christians in the Eastern Bloc Under the doctrine of state atheism in the Soviet Union , there was a "government-sponsored program of forced conversion to atheism " conducted by communists .

[ 237 ] [ 238 ] [ 239 ] This program included the overarching objective to establish not only a fundamentally materialistic conception of the universe, but to foster "direct and open criticism of the religious outlook" by means of establishing an "anti-religious trend" across the entire school.

[ 240 ] The Russian Orthodox Church , for centuries the strongest of all Orthodox Churches, was violently suppressed.

[ 241 ] Revolutionary leader Vladimir Lenin wrote that every religious idea and every idea of God "is unutterable vileness... of the most dangerous kind, 'contagion of the most abominable kind".

[ 242 ] Many priests were killed and imprisoned. Thousands of churches were closed, some turned into hospitals. In 1925, the government founded the League of Militant Atheists to intensify the persecution.

[ 243 ] Christopher Marsh, a professor at Baylor University writes that "Tracing the social nature of religion from Schleiermacher and Feurbach to Marx, Engels, and Lenin... the idea of religion as a social product evolved to the point of policies aimed at the forced conversion of believers to atheism." [ 244 ] Jonathan Blake of the Department of Political Science at Columbia University elucidates the history of this practice in the USSR, stating that: [ 245 ] God, however, did not simply vanish after the Bolshevik revolution. Soviet authorities relied heavily on coercion to spread their idea of scientific atheism. This included confiscating church goods and property, forcibly closing religious institutions and executing religious leaders and believers or sending them to the gulag ... Later, the United States passed the Jackson–Vanik amendment which harmed US–Soviet trade relations until the USSR permitted the emigration of religious minorities, primarily Jews. Despite the threat from coreligionists abroad, however, the Soviet Union engaged in forced atheism from its earliest days.

[ 245 ] Across Eastern Europe following World War II , the parts of the Nazi Empire conquered by the Soviet Red Army , and Yugoslavia became one party communist states and the project of coercive conversion continued.

[ 246 ] [ 247 ] The Soviet Union ended its war time truce against the Russian Orthodox Church, and extended its persecutions to the newly communist Eastern bloc: "In Poland , Hungary, Lithuania and other Eastern European countries, Catholic leaders who were unwilling to be silent were denounced, publicly humiliated or imprisoned by the communists. Leaders of the national Orthodox Churches in Romania and Bulgaria had to be cautious and submissive", wrote Blainey.

[ 241 ] While the churches were generally not as severely treated as they had been in the USSR, nearly all their schools and many of their churches were closed, and they lost their formerly prominent roles in public life. Children were taught atheism, and clergy were imprisoned by the thousands.

[ 248 ] In the Eastern Bloc , Christian churches, Jewish synagogues and Islamic mosques were forcibly "converted into museums of atheism." [ 249 ] [ 250 ] Historical essayist Andrei Brezianu expounds upon this situation, specifically in the Socialist Republic of Romania , writing that scientific atheism was "aggressively applied to Moldova, immediately after the 1940 annexation, when churches were profaned, clergy assaulted, and signs and public symbols of religion were prohibited"; he provides an example of this phenomenon, further writing that "St. Theodora Church in downtown Chişinău was converted into the city's Museum of Scientific Atheism".

[ 236 ] Marxist-Leninist regimes treated religious believers as subversives or abnormal, sometimes relegating them to psychiatric hospitals and reeducation.

[ 251 ] [ 252 ] Nevertheless, historian Emily Baran writes that "some accounts suggest the conversion to militant atheism did not always end individuals' existential questions".

[ 253 ] French Revolution [ edit ] During the French Revolution , a campaign of dechristianization happened which included removal and destruction of religious objects from places of worship; English librarian Thomas Hartwell Horne and biblical scholar Samuel Davidson write that "churches were converted into 'temples of reason,' in which atheistical and licentious homilies were substituted for the proscribed service".

[ 254 ] [ 255 ] [ 256 ] [ 257 ] Unlike later establishments of state atheism by communist regimes , the French Revolutionary experiment was short (seven months), incomplete and inconsistent.

[ 258 ] [ better source needed ] Even though it was brief, the French experiment was particularly notable because it influenced atheists such as Ludwig Feuerbach , Sigmund Freud and Karl Marx .

[ 251 ] East Asia [ edit ] Further information: Antireligious campaigns of the Chinese Communist Party The emergence of communist states across East Asia after World War Two saw religion purged by atheist regimes across China , North Korea and much of Indo-China .

[ 259 ] In 1949, China became a communist state under the leadership of Mao Zedong 's Chinese Communist Party . Prior to this takeover, China itself was previously a cradle of religious thought since ancient times, being the birthplace of Confucianism and Daoism , and Buddhists arrived in the first century CE. Under Mao, China became an officially atheist state , and even though some religious practices were permitted to continue under State supervision, religious groups which are considered a threat to law and order have been suppressed—such as Tibetan Buddhism from 1959 and Falun Gong in recent years.

[ 260 ] Religious schools and social institutions were closed, foreign missionaries were expelled, and local religious practices were discouraged.

[ 259 ] During the Cultural Revolution , Mao instigated "struggles" against the Four Olds : "old ideas, customs, culture, and habits of mind".

[ 261 ] In 1999, the Communist Party launched a three-year drive to promote atheism in Tibet, saying that intensifying atheist propaganda is "especially important for Tibet because atheism plays an extremely important role in promoting economic construction, social advancement and socialist spiritual civilization in the region".

[ 262 ] As of November 2018, in present-day China, the government has detained many people in internment camps , "where Uighur Muslims are remade into atheist Chinese subjects".

[ 263 ] For children who were forcibly taken away from their parents, the Chinese government has established "orphanages" with the aim of "converting future generations of Uighur Muslim children into loyal subjects who embrace atheism".

[ 263 ] Revolutionary Mexico [ edit ] See also: Plutarco Elías Calles , Calles Law , and Cristero War Articles 3, 5, 24, 27, and 130 of the Mexican Constitution of 1917 as originally enacted were anticlerical and enormously restricted religious freedoms.

[ 264 ] At first the anticlerical provisions were only sporadically enforced, but when President Plutarco Elías Calles took office, he enforced the provisions strictly.

[ 264 ] Calles' Mexico has been characterized as an atheist state [ 265 ] and his program as being one to eradicate religion in Mexico.

[ 266 ] All religions had their properties expropriated, and these became part of government wealth. There was a forced expulsion of foreign clergy and the seizure of Church properties.

[ 267 ] Article 27 prohibited any future acquisition of such property by the churches, and prohibited religious corporations and ministers from
establishing or directing primary schools.

[ 267 ] This second prohibition was sometimes interpreted to mean that the Church could not give religious instruction to children within the churches on Sundays, seen as destroying the ability of Catholics to be educated in their own religion.

[ 268 ] The Constitution of 1917 also closed and forbade the existence of monastic orders (article 5), forbade any religious activity outside of church buildings (now owned by the government), and mandated that such religious activity would be overseen by the government (article 24).

[ 267 ] On June 14, 1926, President Calles enacted anticlerical legislation known formally as The Law Reforming the Penal Code and unofficially as the Calles Law .

[ 269 ] His anti-Catholic actions included outlawing religious orders, depriving the Church of property rights and depriving the clergy of civil liberties, including their right to a trial by jury (in cases involving anti-clerical laws) and the right to vote.

[ 269 ] [ 270 ] Catholic antipathy towards Calles was enhanced because of his vocal atheism.

[ 271 ] Cristeros hanged in Jalisco Due to the strict enforcement of anti-clerical laws, people in strongly Catholic areas, especially the states of Jalisco , Zacatecas , Guanajuato , Colima and Michoacán , began to oppose him, and this opposition led to the Cristero War from 1926 to 1929, which was characterized by brutal atrocities on both sides. Some Cristeros applied terrorist tactics, while the Mexican government persecuted the clergy, killing suspected Cristeros and supporters and often retaliating against innocent individuals.

[ 272 ] In Tabasco state, the so-called " Red Shirts " began to act.

A truce was negotiated with the assistance of U.S. Ambassador Dwight Whitney Morrow .

[ 273 ] Calles, however, did not abide by the terms of the truce – in violation of its terms, he had approximately 500 Cristero leaders and 5,000 other Cristeros shot, frequently in their homes in front of their spouses and children.

[ 273 ] Particularly offensive to Catholics after the supposed truce was Calles' insistence on a complete state monopoly on education, suppressing all Catholic education and introducing "socialist" education in its place: "We must enter and take possession of the mind of childhood, the mind of youth".

[ 273 ] The persecution continued as Calles maintained control under his Maximato and did not relent until 1940, when President Manuel Ávila Camacho , a believing Catholic, took office.

[ 273 ] This attempt to indoctrinate the youth in atheism was begun in 1934 by amending Article 3 to the Mexican Constitution to eradicate religion by mandating "socialist education", which "in addition to removing all religious doctrine" would "combat fanaticism and prejudices", "build[ing] in the youth a rational and exact concept of the universe and of social life".

[ 264 ] In 1946 this "socialist education" was removed from the constitution and the document returned to the less egregious generalized secular education.
The effects of the war on the Church were profound. Between 1926 and 1934 at least 40 priests were killed.

[ 273 ] Where there were 4,500 priests operating within the country before the rebellion, in 1934 there were only 334 priests licensed by the government to serve fifteen million people, the rest having been eliminated by emigration, expulsion, and assassination.

[ 273 ] [ 274 ] By 1935, 17 states had no priest at all.

[ 275 ] Southeast Asia [ edit ] Main article: Cambodian genocide From April 1975 to January 1979, the Khmer Rouge ruled Democratic Kampuchea led by Pol Pot under an official policy of state atheism, regarding all forms of religion as “reactionary” and incompatible with the revolutionary ideology.

[ 276 ] The regime abolished religious institutions, prohibited worship, and criminalised the possession of religious texts or symbols.

[ 277 ] Buddhism, followed by the majority of Cambodians, was particularly affected. Monastic life was dismantled when monks were forcibly defrocked and sent to perform agricultural labour, pagodas were closed or destroyed, and statues of the Buddha were defaced or smashed.

[ 278 ] Estimates suggest that out of approximately 60,000 monks in Cambodia before 1975, fewer than 3,000 survived by 1979, with many executed or dying from forced labour, starvation, or illness.

[ 279 ] The destruction extended to Buddhist libraries, manuscripts, and ritual objects, effectively dismantling the country’s centuries-old monastic traditions.

[ 280 ] These policies formed part of the Khmer Rouge's broader attempt to eradicate all pre-revolutionary cultural and social structures in what they called “ Year Zero ”.

[ 281 ] Although the regime did not use the term “conversion to atheism”, the enforced abandonment of religious practice, combined with indoctrination into the state's ideology, effectively compelled the population to adopt an atheist stance in public life.

[ 279 ] See also [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Forced conversion .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Forced conversion .

Al-Baqara 256 Criticism of atheism Criticism of religion Crypto-Christianity Crypto-Islam Crypto-Judaism Crypto-paganism Cuius regio, eius religio Forced conversion of minority girls in Pakistan Forced monasticism Forced circumcision Inquisition Kakure Kirishitan Kirchenkampf Love jihad conspiracy theory Pact of Umar Religious conversion Religious discrimination Religious fanaticism Religious intolerance Religious persecution Religious segregation Religious violence Sectarian violence Supremacism#Religious State religion Vorpahavak Portal : Religion References [ edit ] ^ "International Standards on Freedom of Religion or Belief" .

Human Rights . United Nations.

Archived from the original on 2022-02-02 . Retrieved 2021-09-29 .

Freedom from coercion" section: 1981 Declaration of the General Assembly Art. 1 (2): "No one shall be subject to coercion which would impair his freedom to have a religion or belief of his choice."Human Rights Committee general comment 22 Para . 5: "Article 18.2 bars coercion that would impair the right to have or adopt a religion or belief, including the use of threat of physical force or penal sanctions to compel believers or non-believers to adhere to their religious beliefs and congregations, to recant their religion or belief or to convert...The same protection is enjoyed by holders of all beliefs of a non-religious nature.

^ Rambo, Lewis R.; Farhadian, Charles E. (2014-03-06).

The Oxford Handbook of Religious Conversion . Oxford University Press. p. 429.

ISBN 978-0-19-971354-7 .

^ a b Firth, Raymond (1981) Spiritual Aroma: Religion and Politics Archived 2021-05-05 at the Wayback Machine .

American Anthropologist , New Series, Vol. 83, No. 3, pp. 582–601 ^ "How to Convert to Buddhism - the Buddha Garden" .

Archived from the original on 2021-10-18 . Retrieved 2021-10-18 .

^ 'Threats to Our Existence': Persecution of Ethnic Chin Christians in Burma (PDF) . Chin Human Rights Organisation. 2012.

^ see e.g. John Coffey, Persecution and Toleration on Protestant England 1558–1689 , 2000, p.22 ^ "Internet History Sourcebooks Project" .

sourcebooks.fordham.edu .

Archived from the original on 2021-07-11 . Retrieved 2021-07-11 .

^ Noel Harold Kaylor; Philip Edward Phillips (3 May 2012), A Companion to Boethius in the Middle Ages , BRILL, pp. 14–, ISBN 978-90-04-18354-4 , retrieved 19 January 2013 ^ a b "Codex Theodosianus" in The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium , Oxford University Press , New York & Oxford, 1991, p. 475.

ISBN 0195046528 ^ "LacusCurtius • Roman Law — Theodosian Code (Smith's Dictionary, 1875)" .

penelope.uchicago.edu .

Archived from the original on 2022-02-15 . Retrieved 2021-02-19 .

^ The Theodosian Code and Novels and the Sirmondian Constitutions . Translated by Pharr, Clyde. 1952.

, qtd. in Grout, James (1 October 2014).

"The End of Paganism" . Retrieved 9 May 2017 .

^ a b F.J.F. Soyer (2007).

The Persecution of the Jews and Muslims of Portugal King Manuel I and the End of Religious Tolerance (1496–7) . Brill. pp.

3– 4.

ISBN 9789047431558 .

^ Gregory of Tours, A history of the Franks, Pantianos Classics, 1916 ^ Alessandro Barbero (23 February 2018).

Charlemagne: Father of a Continent . Univ of California Press. pp. 46–.

ISBN 978-0-520-29721-0 .

^ Michael Frassetto (14 March 2013).

The Early Medieval World: From the Fall of Rome to the Time of Charlemagne [2 Volumes] . ABC-CLIO. pp. 489–.

ISBN 978-1-59884-996-7 .

^ For the Massacre of Verden, see Barbero, Alessandro (2004).

^ Abraham Joshua Heschel; Joachim Neugroschel; Sylvia Heschel (1983).

Maimonides: A Biography . Macmillan. p. 43.

ISBN 9780374517595 .

^ "POPE INNOCENT III, On the Jews and Forced Baptisms (1199, 1201, 1209)" .

ccjr.us . 2008-12-20.

Archived from the original on 2024-05-27 . Retrieved 2024-11-14 .

^ "Hist/J ST/RL ST 235" .

Archived from the original on 2023-04-02 . Retrieved 2023-04-02 .

^ Chazan, Robert, ed., Church, State, and Jew in the Middle Ages, West Orange, NJ:Behrman House, 1980, p. 103.

^ Christiansen, Eric. The Northern Crusades. London: Penguin Books. pg. 71 ^ Christiansen, Eric. The Northern Crusades. London: Penguin Books. pg. 95 ^ The German Hansa , P. Dollinger, page 34, 1999, Routledge ^ Lowenstein, Steven (2001).

The Jewish Cultural Tapestry: International Jewish Folk Traditions . Oxford University Press. p. 36.

ISBN 9780195313604 .

^ F.J.F. Soyer (2007).

The Persecution of the Jews and Muslims of Portugal King Manuel I and the End of Religious Tolerance (1496–7) . Brill. p. 182.

ISBN 9789047431558 .

^ Harvey, L. P. (16 May 2005).

Muslims in Spain, 1500 to 1614 . University of Chicago Press. p. 64.

ISBN 978-0-226-31963-6 .

^ Neese, Shelley (17 November 2008).

"3000 Years of Sephardic History" .

The Jerusalem Connection, International . Archived from the original on 8 January 2011 . Retrieved 9 May 2017 .

^ "Ius emigrandi of the Religious Peace of Augsburg (1555) | German History Intersections" .

germanhistory-intersections.org . Retrieved 2025-01-11 .

^ "April 1624: Re-Catholicisation of Czech lands begins" .

Radio Prague International . 7 April 2024.

^ "The Counter-Reformation and Protestant rebellion" . Encyclopædia Britannica.

^ Fisher, Ian (May 24, 2007).

"Pope Concedes Unjustifiable Crimes in Converting South Americans" .

New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 1, 2020 . Retrieved August 9, 2020 .

^ Maureen Perrie, ed. (2006).

The Cambridge History of Russia: Volume 1, From Early Rus' to 1689 . Cambridge University Press. p. 66.

^ Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland . Britannica Educational Publishing. 2013-06-01. p. 48.

ISBN 9781615309917 .

^ Mara Kalnins (2015).

"Latvia: A Short History" . Oxford University Press. p. 55.

ISBN 9781849046060 .

^ Maureen Perrie, ed. (2006).

The Cambridge History of Russia: Volume 1, From Early Rus' to 1689 . Cambridge University Press. pp.

319– 320.

^ Dominic Lieven, ed. (2006).

The Cambridge History of Russia: Volume 2, Imperial Russia, 1689–1917 . Cambridge University Press. p. 186.

ISBN 9780521815291 .

^ Mendonça, Délio de (2002).

Conversions and Citizenry: Goa Under Portugal, 1510-1610 . Concept Publishing Company. p. 397.

ISBN 978-81-7022-960-5 .

^ Machado Prabhu, Alan (1999).

Sarasvati's Children: A History of the Mangalorean Christians . I.J.A. Publications.

^ de Souza, Teotonio (1989).

Essays in Goan History . Concept Publishing Company.

^ Sabrina P. Ramet (31 October 2011).

Serbia and the Serbs in World War Two . Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp. 237–.

ISBN 978-0-230-34781-6 .

^ Rory Yeomans (April 2013).

Visions of Annihilation: The Ustasha Regime and the Cultural Politics of Fascism, 1941–1945 . University of Pittsburgh Pre. pp. 21–.

ISBN 978-0-8229-7793-3 .

^ the word revert is used in this context; not convert; see Older than the Church: Christianity and Caste in The God of Small Things India Archived 2018-03-26 at the Wayback Machine by A Sekhar; Washington Times article Archived 2010-09-25 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Indian Agra Muslim fear conversions to Hinduism" .

BBC News . 2014-12-11.

Archived from the original on 2015-05-17 . Retrieved May 5, 2015 .

^ "Hindu extremists threaten to kill Christians in India if they 'utter the name of Christ' " . September 2015. Archived from the original on 2 September 2015.

^ "India Accelerates Forced Conversions | FSSPX News" . 13 February 2024. Archived from the original on 22 February 2024.

^ "Christians face conversion threat in riot-hit Indian state - UCA News" . Archived from the original on 24 May 2023.

^ " 'Misuse' of PESA Act in Ghar Wapsi of Chhattisgarh Tribal Christians: Report" .

Newsclick . 21 February 2023. Archived from the original on 22 February 2023.

^ Chamberlain, Gethin (18 October 2008).

"Convert or we will kill you, Hindu lynch mobs tell fleeing Christians | India | the Guardian" .

The Observer . Archived from the original on 8 April 2016.

^ Thakur, Udit (29 January 2015).

"Are India's Christians and Muslims Forced to Become Hindus?" .

The Daily Beast . Archived from the original on 5 June 2017.

^ "Conversion of Christians and Muslims in India: Homecoming or forced conversion? | Qantara.de" . 16 March 2015. Archived from the original on 24 December 2023.

^ "India parliament uproar over conversions by Hindu groups" .

BBC News . 22 December 2014. Archived from the original on 14 June 2025.

^ "CatholicHerald.co.uk » Cardinal protests against forced conversions to Hinduism" .

Catholic Herald . 2014-12-30.

Archived from the original on 2015-05-06 . Retrieved May 5, 2015 .

^ "Nationalist party: India is not a country for Christians" . Archived from the original on 30 October 2017.

^ "Hindu Extremists Threaten Genocide Against Christians" . 24 February 2025. Archived from the original on 14 June 2025.

^ "The Hindutva War on Christians in India" . 12 January 2022. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022.

^ "India's Hindu extremists are calling for genocide against Muslims. Why is little being done to stop them?" .

CNN . 15 January 2022. Archived from the original on 2022-01-15.

^ "Hindu extremists in India escalate rhetoric with calls to kill Muslims" .

NBC News . 2022-01-18. Archived from the original on 2022-01-18 . Retrieved 2024-11-14 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "Has the Hindu majority developed a 'Nazi conscience' in India? - The Loop" . 2023-09-27. Archived from the original on 2023-09-27 . Retrieved 2024-11-14 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ a b Nau, François (13 November 2013).

Le'Expansion Nestorienne en Asie . Gorgias Press, LLC. pp.

106– 13.

ISBN 9781611438321 .

^ Byzantium and the Early Islamic Conquests . Cambridge University Press. 30 March 1995. p. 109.

ISBN 978-0-521-48455-8 .

^ "Islam" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . New York. 17 August 2021.

Archived from the original on 4 May 2015 . Retrieved 12 January 2022 .

{{ cite encyclopedia }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ [1] - Islam Q&A (Archived), Fatwa No. 34770 ^ Waines (2003) "An Introduction to Islam" Cambridge University Press . p. 53 ^ Michael Bonner (2008).

Jihad in Islamic History . Princeton University Press. pp.

89– 90.

ISBN 978-1400827381 .

To begin with, there was no forced conversion, no choice between "Islam and the Sword". Islamic law, following a clear Quranic principle (2:256), prohibited any such things [...] although there have been instances of forced conversion in Islamic history, these have been exceptional.

^ a b c Ira M. Lapidus.

Islamic Societies to the Nineteenth Century: A Global History . p. 345.

^ A History of Islamic Societies . Ira M. Lapidus. 1988. pp. Lapidus, 271.

ISBN 0521225523 .

^ Kishori Saran Lal . "Political conditions of the Hindus under the Khaljis".

Proceedings of the Indian History Congress .

9 .

Indian History Congress : 232.

^ a b Gerhard Bowering, ed. (2009).

Islamic Political Thought: An Introduction . Princeton University Press. pp.

127– 128.

ISBN 9781400866427 .

^ Wael B. Hallaq (2009).

Sharī'a: Theory, Practice, Transformations . Cambridge University Press. pp.

327– 328.

ISBN 9780521861472 .

^ Parsons, L. (2000).

The Druze between Palestine and Israel 1947–49 . Springer. p. 2.

ISBN 9780230595989 .

With the succession of al-Zahir to the Fatimid caliphate a mass persecution (known by the Druze as the period of the mihna ) of the Muwaḥḥidūn was instigated ...

^ Hitti, Philip Khūri (1924).

Origins of the Druze People and Religion . Forgotten Books.

ISBN 978-1-60506-068-2 . Retrieved 4 April 2012 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ C. Tucker, Spencer C. (2019).

Middle East Conflicts from Ancient Egypt to the 21st Century: An Encyclopedia and Document Collection [4 volumes] . ABC-CLIO. pp.

364– 366.

ISBN 9781440853531 .

^ Taraze Fawaz, Leila.

An occasion for war: civil conflict in Lebanon and Damascus in 1860 . p.63.

^ Goren, Haim.

Dead Sea Level: Science, Exploration and Imperial Interests in the Near East.

p.95-96.

^ C. Tucker, Spencer C. (2019).

Middle East Conflicts from Ancient Egypt to the 21st Century: An Encyclopedia and Document Collection [4 volumes] . ABC-CLIO. p. 364.

ISBN 9781440853531 .

^ Zabad, Ibrahim (2017).

Middle Eastern Minorities: The Impact of the Arab Spring . Routledge.

ISBN 9781317096726 .

^ Richard W. Bullient (2013). "Conversion". In Gerhard Böwering, Patricia Crone (ed.).

The Princeton Encyclopedia of Islamic Political Thought . Princeton University Press.

^ a b Lewis, Bernard (2002).

Arabs in History . Oxford University Press (Kindle edition). p. 50.

^ "Ridda Wars" .

World History Encyclopedia . 5 June 2020.

Archived from the original on 2021-06-25 . Retrieved 2021-06-25 .

^ The Origins of the Islamic State, Being a Translation from the Arabic, Accompanied with Annotations, Geographic and Historic Notes of the Kitâb Fitûh Al-buldân of Al-Imâm Abu-l Abbâs Ahmad Ibn-Jâbir Al-Balâdhuri . Columbia university. 1916. p. 103.

^ Moshe Gil (1992).

A History of Palestine, 634–1099 . CUP Archive. p. 822.

ISBN 9780521404372 .

^ a b Sahner, Christian C. (2020) [2018].

"Introduction: Christian Martyrs under Islam" .

Christian Martyrs under Islam: Religious Violence and the Making of the Muslim World .

Princeton, New Jersey and Woodstock, Oxfordshire : Princeton University Press . pp.

1– 28.

ISBN 978-0-691-17910-0 .

LCCN 2017956010 .

^ a b c Runciman, Steven (1987) [1951].

"The Reign of Antichrist" .

A History of the Crusades, Volume 1: The First Crusade and the Foundation of the Kingdom of Jerusalem .

Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . pp.

20– 37.

ISBN 978-0-521-34770-9 .

^ a b c d e Stillman, Norman A.

(1998) [1979].

"Under the New Order" .

The Jews of Arab Lands: A History and Source Book .

Philadelphia : Jewish Publication Society . pp.

22– 28.

ISBN 978-0-8276-0198-7 .

^ Penn, Michael Philip (5 June 2015).

Envisioning Islam: Syriac Christians and the Early Muslim World . University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 59.

ISBN 9780812291445 .

^ Sahner, Christian C. (14 August 2018).

Christian Martyrs Under Islam: Religious Violence and the Making of the Muslim World . Princeton University Press. p. 257.

ISBN 978-0-691-18418-0 .

^ Tritton, A. S. (18 October 2013).

Caliphs and Their Non-Muslim Subjects: A Critical Study of the Covenant of 'Umar . Routledge. p. 78.

ISBN 978-1-134-53790-7 .

^ Journal of Indian History: Volumes 5-6 . 1926. p. 54.

^ Gil, Moshe (27 February 1997).

A History of Palestine, 634-1099 . Cambridge University Press. p. 473.

ISBN 9780521599849 .

^ a b c Verskin, Alan (2020).

"Medieval Jewish Perspectives on Almohad Persecutions: Memory, Repression, and Impact" . In García-Arenal, Mercedes; Glazer-Eytan, Yonatan (eds.).

Forced Conversion in Christianity, Judaism, and Islam: Coercion and Faith in Premodern Iberia and Beyond . Numen Book Series. Vol. 164.

Leiden and Boston : Brill Publishers . pp.

155– 172.

doi : 10.1163/9789004416826_008 .

ISBN 978-90-04-41681-9 .

ISSN 0169-8834 .

S2CID 211666012 .

^ María Rosa Menocal, The Ornament of the World: How Muslims, Jews, and Christians created a culture of tolerance in medieval Spain ^ a b c Amira K. Bennison and María Ángeles Gallego. " Jewish Trading in Fes On The Eve of the Almohad Conquest Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine ."  MEAH, sección Hebreo 56 (2007), 33–51 ^ a b c M.J. Viguera, "Almohads". In Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World , Executive Editor Norman A. Stillman. First published online: 2010 First print edition: ISBN 978-90-04-17678-2 , 2014 ^ a b Silverman, Eric (2013).

"Bitter Bonnets and Badges" .

A Cultural History of Jewish Dress .

London and New York : Bloomsbury Academic . pp.

47– 48.

ISBN 978-1-84520-513-3 .

^ Ross Brann, Power in the Portrayal: Representations of Jews and Muslims in Eleventh- and Twelfth-Century Islamic Spain , Princeton University Press, 2009, pp. 121–122.

^ Frank and Leaman, 2003, pp. 137–138.

^ Wasserstein, David J. (2020).

"The Intellectual Genealogy of Almohad Policy towards Christians and Jews" . In García-Arenal, Mercedes; Glazer-Eytan, Yonatan (eds.).

Forced Conversion in Christianity, Judaism, and Islam: Coercion and Faith in Premodern Iberia and Beyond . Numen Book Series. Vol. 164.

Leiden and Boston : Brill Publishers . pp.

133– 154.

doi : 10.1163/9789004416826_007 .

ISBN 978-90-04-41681-9 .

ISSN 0169-8834 .

S2CID 211665760 .

^ Maribel Fierro (2010). "The Almohads (524 668/1130 1269) and the Hafsids (627 932/1229 1526)". In Maribel Fierro (ed.).

The New Cambridge History of Islam . Vol. 2. Cambridge University Press. p. 86.

^ Lawrence Fine (2001-11-18).

Judaism in Practice: From the Middle Ages Through the Early Modern Period . Princeton University Press. p. 414.

ISBN 978-0691057873 .

^ "The Great Rambam: Joel Kraemer's 'Maimonides' – The New York Sun" . Nysun.com. 2008-09-24. Archived from the original on 2012-10-11 . Retrieved 2012-11-13 .

^ Bernard Lewis (2014).

The Jews of Islam . Princeton University Press. p. 100.

ISBN 9781400820290 .

^ The Decline of Medieval Hellenism in Asia Minor and the Process of Islamization from the Eleventh Through the Fifteenth Century . American Council of Learned Societies. 2008. p. 181.

ISBN 978-1-59740-476-1 .

^ Rubin, Miri; Katznelson, Ira (28 July 2014).

Religious Conversion: History, Experience and Meaning . Ashgate Publishing. p. 73.

ISBN 9781472421494 .

^ Ellenblum, Ronnie (2 August 2012).

The Collapse of the Eastern Mediterranean: Climate Change and the Decline of the East, 950-1072 . Cambridge University Press. p. 246.

ISBN 9781139560986 .

^ The Epistles of Maimonides: Crisis and Leadership, ed.:Abraham S. Halkin, David Hartman, Jewish Publication Society, 1982. p.91 ^ a b c d Jews, Christians and Muslims in Medieval and Early Modern Times: A Festschrift in Honor of Mark R. Cohen . Brill Publishers. 2014. p. 181.

ISBN 9789004267848 .

^ Herbert Davidson (2004-12-09).

Moses Maimonides: The Man and His Works . Oxford University Press. p. 489.

ISBN 9780195343618 .

^ Reuben Ahroni (1994).

The Jews of the British Crown Colony of Aden: History, Culture, and Ethnic Relations . Brill Publishers. p. 21.

ISBN 978-9004101104 .

^ Ahmad Dallal (16 November 2011).

"On Muslim Curiosity and the Historiography of the Jews of Yemen" . In Joseph V. Montville (ed.).

History as Prelude: Muslims and Jews in the Medieval Mediterranean . Lexington Books. pp.

75– 76.

ISBN 9780739168158 .

^ Tudor Parfitt (1996-01-01).

The Road to Redemption: The Jews of the Yemen, 1900–1950 . Brill Publishers. pp.

66– 67, 69.

ISBN 978-9004105447 .

^ a b Wittek, Paul (1955). "Devs̱ẖirme and s̱ẖarī'a".

Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies (University of London) .

17 (2).

Cambridge : Cambridge University Press : 271– 278.

doi : 10.1017/S0041977X00111735 .

JSTOR 610423 .

OCLC 427969669 .

S2CID 153615285 .

^ Krstić, Tijana (2009).

"Conversion" . In Ágoston, Gábor; Masters, Bruce (eds.).

Encyclopedia of the Ottoman Empire .

New York : Facts On File . pp.

145– 146.

ISBN 978-0-8160-6259-1 .

LCCN 2008020716 . Retrieved 28 March 2021 .

As a part of their education, devşirme children underwent compulsory conversion to Islam, which is the only documented forced form of conversion organized by the Ottoman state.

^ A. E. Vacalopoulos.

The Greek Nation , 1453–1669, New Brunswick, New Jersey, Rutgers University Press, 1976, p. 41; Vasiliki Papoulia, The Impact of Devshirme on Greek Society, in War and Society in East Central Europe , Editor—in—Chief, Bela K. Kiraly, 1982, Vol. II, pp. 561—562.

^ David Nicolle (1995-05-15), The Janissaries , Bloomsbury USA, p. 12, ISBN 9781855324138 [ permanent dead link ] ^ a b c Kohler, Kaufmann ; Malter, Henry (1906).

"Shabbetai Ẓevi" .

Jewish Encyclopedia .

Kopelman Foundation .

Archived from the original on 15 August 2007 . Retrieved 6 October 2020 .

At the command [of the sultan], Shabbetai was now taken from Abydos to Adrianople , where the sultan's physician, a former Jew, advised Shabbetai to embrace Islam as the only means of saving his life. Shabbetai realized the danger of his situation and adopted the physician's advice. On the following day [...] being brought before the sultan, he cast off his Jewish garb and put a Turkish turban on his head; and thus his conversion to Islam was accomplished. The sultan was much pleased, and rewarded Shabbetai by conferring on him the title (Mahmed) "Effendi" and appointing him as his doorkeeper with a high salary. [...] To complete his acceptance of Mohammedanism, Shabbetai was ordered to take an additional wife , a Mohammedan slave , which order he obeyed. [...] Meanwhile, Shabbetai secretly continued his plots, playing a double game. At times he would assume the role of a pious Mohammedan and revile Judaism; at others he would enter into relations with Jews as one of their own faith. Thus in March, 1668, he gave out anew that he had been filled with the Holy Spirit at Passover and had received a revelation. He, or one of his followers , published a mystic work addressed to the Jews in which the most fantastic notions were set forth, e.g., that he was the true Redeemer, in spite of his conversion, his object being to bring over thousands of Mohammedans to Judaism. To the sultan he said that his activity among the Jews was to bring them over to Islam. He therefore received permission to associate with his former coreligionists, and even to preach in their synagogues. He thus succeeded in bringing over a number of Mohammedans to his cabalistic views , and, on the other hand, in converting many Jews to Islam, thus forming a Judæo-Turkish sect (see Dönmeh ), whose followers implicitly believed in him [as the Jewish Messiah ]. This double-dealing with Jews and Mohammedans, however, could not last very long. Gradually the Turks tired of Shabbetai's schemes. He was deprived of his salary, and banished from Adrianople to Constantinople . In a village near the latter city he was one day surprised while singing psalms in a tent with Jews, whereupon the grand vizier ordered his banishment to Dulcigno , a small place in Albania , where he died in loneliness and obscurity.

^ "Judaism – The Lurianic Kabbalah: Shabbetaianism" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Edinburgh : Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.

23 January 2020.

Archived from the original on 12 October 2020 . Retrieved 6 October 2020 .

Rabbi Shabbetai Tzevi of Smyrna (1626–76), who proclaimed himself messiah in 1665. Although the "messiah" was forcibly converted to Islam in 1666 and ended his life in exile 10 years later, he continued to have faithful followers . A sect was thus born and survived, largely thanks to the activity of Nathan of Gaza (c. 1644–90), an unwearying propagandist who justified the actions of Shabbetai Tzevi, including his final apostasy, with theories based on the Lurian doctrine of "repair" . Tzevi's actions, according to Nathan, should be understood as the descent of the just into the abyss of the "shells" in order to liberate the captive particles of divine light. The Shabbetaian crisis lasted nearly a century, and some of its aftereffects lasted even longer. It led to the formation of sects whose members were externally converted to Islam—e.g., the Dönme (Turkish: "Apostates") of Salonika , whose descendants still live in Turkey —or to Roman Catholicism —e.g., the Polish supporters of Jacob Frank (1726–91), the self-proclaimed messiah and Catholic convert (in Bohemia-Moravia , however, the Frankists outwardly remained Jews).

^ Kirsch, Adam (15 February 2010).

" "The Other Secret Jews", review of Marc David Baer, The Dönme: Jewish Converts, Muslim Revolutionaries, and Secular Turks " .

The New Republic .

New York .

Archived from the original on 17 February 2010 . Retrieved 6 October 2020 .

^ Nevra Necipoğlu (2009).

Byzantium Between the Ottomans and the Latins: Politics and Society in the Late Empire . Cambridge University Press. pp.

142– 143.

ISBN 9780521877381 .

^ The Decline of Medieval Hellenism in Asia Minor and the Process of Islamization from the Eleventh Through the Fifteenth Century . American Council of Learned Societies. 2008.

ISBN 9781597404761 .

^ Revista de istorie . Editura Academiei Republicii Socialiste România. 1979.

^ Giese, Friedrich (1922).

"Die altosmanischen anonymen Chroniken" .

^ Miklosich, Franz; Müller, Josef (22 March 2012).

Acta et Diplomata Graeca Medii Aevi Sacra et Profana . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9781108044547 .

^ Vakalopoulos, Apostolos Euangelou (1970).

Origins of the Greek Nation: The Byzantine Period, 1204-1461 . Rutgers University Press.

ISBN 9780813506593 .

^ Byzantium and Islam: Collected Studies on Byzantine-Muslim Encounters . BRILL. 22 November 2021.

ISBN 9789004470477 .

^ a b "The "neomartyrs" as evidence for methods and motives leading to conversion and martyrdom in the Ottoman Empire" .

The Greek Orthodox Theological Review .

23 (3/4): 216. 1978.

Archived from the original on 2022-12-11 . Retrieved 2022-12-11 .

^ Duĭchev, Ivan (1977).

Histoire de la Bulgarie des origines à nos jours . Horvath. pp. 251, 259.

ISBN 9782717100846 .

^ a b Yeʼor, Bat; Bat, Ye'or (1996).

The Decline of Eastern Christianity Under Islam: From Jihad to Dhimmitude : Seventh-twentieth Century . Fairleigh Dickinson Univ Press.

ISBN 9780838636886 .

^ Tavernier, Jean-Baptiste; Starkey, John (17 December 2020).

The Six Voyages of John Baptista Tavernier: Through Turkey into Persia and the East-Indies Finished in the Year, Giving an Account of the State of Those Countries . Hansebooks.

ISBN 9783348019583 .

^ Persecution of the Greeks in Turkey, 1914–1918 . Constantinople [London, Printed by the Hesperia Press]. 1919.

^ Savory, R.M.; Gandjeï, T. (2012). "Ismāʿīl I". In P. Bearman; Th. Bianquis; C.E. Bosworth; E. van Donzel; W.P. Heinrichs (eds.).

Encyclopaedia of Islam . Vol. 4 (2nd ed.). Brill. p. 186.

^ H.R. Roemer (1986). "The Safavid Period". In William Bayne Fisher; Peter Jackson; Lawrence Lockhart (eds.).

The Cambridge History of Iran . Vol. 6. Cambridge University Press. p. 218.

^ Lewis, Bernard (1984). The Jews of Islam. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-691-00807-8 . p.52 ^ Lapidus, Ira M.

(2014).

A History of Islamic Societies . Cambridge University Press (Kindle edition). pp.

385– 386.

ISBN 978-0-521-51430-9 .

^ Pirnazar, Jaleh.

"The "Jadid al-Islams" of Mashhad" .

Foundation for Iranian Studies . Bethesda, MD, USA. Archived from the original on 2021-02-24 . Retrieved 2012-11-13 .

^ Ramesh Chandra Majumdar (1951).

The History and Culture of the Indian People: The struggle for empire . p. 12.

^ Catherine B. Asher.

India 2001: Reference Encyclopedia, Volume 1 . South Asia Publications. p. 29.

^ a b Lal, K.S. (2004). "1".

Indian Muslims:Who Are They . Voice of India.

ISBN 978-8185990101 .

^ Habibullah, The Foundation of Muslim Rule in India , (Allahabad, 1961), pp.69 and 334 ^ Hasan Nizami, Taj-ul-Maasir , II, p.216 ^ Titus, Murray.

Islam in India and Pakistan , ( Calcutta , 1959), p.31 ^ Shiri Ram Bakshi (1997).

Kashmir: Valley and Its Culture . Sarup & Sons. p.

70 .

^ Claude Markovits.

A History of Modern India, 1480–1950 . Anthem Press. p. 108.

^ Grewal, J. S (1998).

The Sikhs of the Punjab . Cambridge University Press. p. 72.

ISBN 0521637643 .

^ Pashaura Singh, Louis E. Fenech (2014).

The Oxford Handbook of Sikh Studies . Oxford. p. 236.

ISBN 9780191004117 .

^ Singh, Khushwant (2017).

Ranjit Singh: Maharaja of the Punjab . Penguin UK. p. 22.

^ a b Rachel Fell McDermott; Leonard A. Gordon; Ainslie T. Embree; Frances W. Pritchett; Dennis Dalton (2014).

Sources of Indian Traditions: Modern India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh . Columbia University Press. p. 9.

^ a b Kristen Haar, Sewa Singh Kalsi.

Sikhism . Infobase publishing. p. 110.

^ Harbans Kaur Sagoo (2001).

Banda Singh Bahadur and Sikh Sovereignty . Deep and Deep Publications. p. 226.

^ Singh, Ganda (1935).

Life of Banda Singh Bahadur: Based on Contemporary and Original Records . Sikh History Research Department. p. 229.

^ Varghese, Alexander (2008).

India: History, Religion, Vision and Contribution to the World, Volume 1 . Atlantic Publishers.

ISBN 9788126909032 .

^ Paul, Thomas (1954).

Christians and Christianity in India and Pakistan: a general survey of the progress of Christianity in India from apostolic times to the present day . Allen & Unwin. p. 235.

^ Jain, Meenakshi (2019).

Flight of Deities and Rebirth of Temples: Episodes from Indian History . New Delhi: Aryan Books International.

ISBN 978-8173056192 .

^ Sanjeev Sanyal.

The Ocean of Churn: How the Indian Ocean Shaped Human History . Penguin UK. p. 188.

^ Anis Ahmed (February 28, 2013).

"Bangladesh Islamist's death sentence sparks deadly riots" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on April 5, 2023 . Retrieved March 1, 2013 .

^ Arun Devnath; Andrew MacAskill (March 1, 2013).

"Clashes Kill 35 in Bangladesh After Islamist Sentenced to Hang" .

Bloomberg L.P.

Archived from the original on April 4, 2023 . Retrieved March 1, 2013 .

^ Julfikar Ali Manik; Jim Yardley (March 1, 2013).

"Death Toll From Bangladesh Unrest Reaches 44" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2022 . Retrieved March 1, 2013 .

^ [2] Archived 2012-04-12 at the Wayback Machine 26 Hindus beheeaded by Islamist militants in Kashmir ^ Khan, Yasmin (2007).

The Great Partition: The Making of India and Pakistan . Yale University Press. pp.

68 –69.

ISBN 978-0-300-12078-3 .

Noakhali.

^ "Fatal flaw in communal violence bill" .

Rediff.com . July 2, 2011.

Archived from the original on December 25, 2018 . Retrieved August 2, 2011 .

^ "Religious Minorities in 'Naya Pakistan' " .

thediplomat.com .

Archived from the original on 2022-01-19 . Retrieved 2023-09-02 .

^ Imtiaz, Saba; Walsh, Declan (July 15, 2014).

"Extremists Make Inroads in Pakistan's Diverse South" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 18, 2019 . Retrieved July 11, 2021 .

^ United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (30 April 2013).

"Refworld – USCIRF Annual Report 2013 – Countries of Particular Concern: Pakistan" .

Refworld .

Archived from the original on 17 December 2014 . Retrieved May 5, 2015 .

^ "Pakistan: Religious conversion, including treatment of converts and forced conversions (2009–2012)" (PDF) .

Responses to Information Requests .

Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada . January 14, 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 16, 2016 . Retrieved September 11, 2022 .

^ "1,000 Christian, Hindu girls forced to convert to Islam every year in Pakistan: report" .

India Today . April 8, 2014.

Archived from the original on January 9, 2018 . Retrieved January 19, 2018 .

^ Anwar, Iqbal (2014-04-08).

"1,000 minority girls forced in marriage every year: report" .

Dawn .

Archived from the original on 2019-05-13 . Retrieved 25 July 2014 .

^ "India ruling party chief urges law against religious conversions" .

Dunya News . New Delhi.

AFP . 20 December 2014.

Archived from the original on 14 March 2020 . Retrieved 20 December 2014 .

^ "Pakistan" .

Annual Report on International Religious Freedom, 2004 .

United States Commission on International Religious Freedom , State Dept (US) , Senate Committee on Foreign Relations (US). 2005. p. 667.

ISBN 978-0-16072-552-4 .

^ Jahangir, Sulema (2020-04-12).

"Forced conversions" .

DAWN.COM .

Archived from the original on 2023-12-03 . Retrieved 2023-09-16 .

^ "SC orders release of Rinkle Kumari, others" .

Pakistan Observer . April 19, 2012. Archived from the original on 2014-02-21 . Retrieved 2012-06-05 .

^ "Hindus in Pak happy after girl's statement in SC" .

Deccan Herald . 27 March 2012.

Archived from the original on 15 January 2022 . Retrieved 11 February 2020 .

^ "Curbs on forced conversion" .

The Express Tribune . 7 December 2016.

Archived from the original on 30 April 2019 . Retrieved 11 February 2020 .

^ Walsh, Declan (25 March 2012).

"Pakistani Hindus Say Woman's Conversion to Islam Was Coerced" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 23 September 2019 . Retrieved 9 April 2019 .

^ "Sikh community in Hangu 'being forced to convert' " .

The Express Tribune . 16 December 2017.

Archived from the original on 21 January 2018 . Retrieved 16 January 2018 .

^ "Sikhs in Pakistan complain of pressure to convert" .

Hindustan Times . 16 December 2017.

Archived from the original on 30 September 2018 . Retrieved 16 January 2018 .

^ "Sikhs told to 'convert to Islam' by Pakistani official" .

Rabwah Times . December 16, 2017.

Archived from the original on 30 September 2018 . Retrieved 16 January 2018 .

^ Anwar, Madeeha (December 23, 2017).

"Authorities Investigate Cases of Forced Conversion of Sikh Minority in Pakistan" .

Extremism Watch Desk .

Voice of America .

Archived from the original on 1 April 2019 . Retrieved 16 January 2018 .

^ "Forced conversions torment Pakistan's Hindus | India | Al Jazeera" .

Archived from the original on 2019-06-29 . Retrieved 2019-03-08 .

^ "1,000 Christian, Hindu girls forced to convert to Islam every year in Pakistan: report" .

India Today . April 8, 2014.

Archived from the original on 2018-01-09 . Retrieved 2019-03-08 .

^ "Pakistan, Hindus, Forced Conversions, Islam" .

Archived from the original on 2019-06-29 . Retrieved 2019-03-08 .

^ Ilyas, Faiza (March 20, 2015).

"265 cases of forced conversion reported last year, moot told" .

DAWN.COM .

Archived from the original on January 16, 2022 . Retrieved July 11, 2021 .

^ Manan, Abdul (25 May 2010).

"57 Hindus convert to Islam in 10 days" .

The Express Tribune .

Archived from the original on 23 April 2019 . Retrieved 9 April 2019 .

^ "Sikhs in Pakistan 'being forced to convert to Islam' " .

Tribuneindia News Service .

Archived from the original on 2020-03-14 . Retrieved 2021-07-11 .

^ "Sikh community in Hangu 'being forced to convert' " .

The Express Tribune . December 15, 2017.

Archived from the original on January 15, 2022 . Retrieved July 11, 2021 .

^ "Sushma: 'Conversion' of Pakistan Sikhs: CM Amarinder seeks Sushma's help | Amritsar News – Times of India" .

The Times of India . 20 December 2017.

Archived from the original on 14 January 2019 . Retrieved 8 March 2019 .

^ "Mass conversions: For Matli's poor Hindus, 'lakshmi' lies in another religion" .

The Express Tribune . January 20, 2012.

Archived from the original on March 5, 2022 . Retrieved July 11, 2021 .

^ "250 Hindus convert to Islam in Thatta" .

The Nation . September 16, 2017.

Archived from the original on August 26, 2019 . Retrieved August 26, 2019 .

^ "100,000 conversions and counting, meet the ex-Hindu who herds souls to the Hereafter" .

The Express Tribune . January 22, 2012.

Archived from the original on January 16, 2022 . Retrieved July 11, 2021 .

^ "Forced conversions, marriages spike in Pakistan" . June 6, 2019.

Archived from the original on November 6, 2019 . Retrieved June 7, 2019 .

^ Abi-Habib, Maria; Ur-Rehman, Zia (4 August 2020).

"Poor and Desperate, Pakistani Hindus Accept Islam to Get By" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 2020-08-14.

^ "Pakistan high court upholds forced marriage of abducted Catholic minor" .

Catholic Herald . October 28, 2020.

Archived from the original on January 15, 2022 . Retrieved November 10, 2020 .

^ "Abducted underage Catholic girl rescued in Pakistan - Vatican News" .

Vatican News . 2020-11-04 . Retrieved 2025-06-21 .

^ Inam, Palwasha Binte (2020-07-10).

"Forced Conversions in Pakistan" .

Modern Diplomacy .

Archived from the original on 2023-07-21 . Retrieved 2023-07-21 .

^ "Indonesia: thousands of Catholic children kidnapped and forced to convert to Islam" . Archived from the original on September 27, 2015 . Retrieved May 5, 2015 .

^ "Sampang Shiites forced to convert to Sunni: Kontras" . Archived from the original on 2015-04-30 . Retrieved May 5, 2015 .

^ "Indonesian president condemns mob killing of Ahmadiyah Muslims" .

the Guardian . Associated Press. 2011-02-07 . Retrieved May 5, 2015 .

^ Crouch, Melissa (2010).

"Indonesia, Militant Islam and Ahmadiya" (PDF) . University of Melbourne, Australia.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-03-30.

Alt URL ^ Maluku refugees allege forced circumcision, BBC News Online, Wednesday, January 31, 2001 [3] Archived 2002-09-10 at the Wayback Machine ^ Henschke, Rebecca (2017-11-17).

"Indonesia's Orang Rimba: Forced to renounce their faith" .

BBC . Archived from the original on 17 November 2017.

^ O'Loughlin, Ed (16 August 2014).

"Devil in the detail as Yazidis look to Kurds in withstanding Islamic radicals' advance" .

Irish Times .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2014 . Retrieved 16 August 2014 .

^ Nick Cumming-Bruce (June 16, 2016). "ISIS Committed Genocide Against Yazidis in Syria and Iraq, U.N. Panel Says".

The New York Times .

^ "Christian Minorities in the Islamic Middle East : Rosie Malek-Yonan on the Assyrians" .

Radio National . 2006-04-18.

Archived from the original on 2008-07-24 . Retrieved May 5, 2015 .

^ "BBC NEWS – Middle East – Iraq's Mandaeans 'face extinction' " . 2007-03-04.

Archived from the original on 2008-07-27 . Retrieved May 5, 2015 .

^ "CNN.com – Kidnapped Fox journalists released – Aug 27, 2006" . Retrieved May 5, 2015 .

^ Shanahan, Angela (May 21, 2011).

"No going back for Egypt's converted Copts" .

The Australian . Archived from the original on 23 August 2011 . Retrieved September 13, 2015 .

^ McGrath, Cam (April 16, 2013).

"Missing Christian girls leave a trail of tears" .

Inter Press Agency .

Archived from the original on August 22, 2013 . Retrieved July 28, 2013 .

^ United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

"Refworld – 2012 Report on International Religious Freedom – Egypt" .

Refworld .

Archived from the original on December 17, 2014 . Retrieved May 5, 2015 .

^ Heba Saleh (BBC News, Cairo), 'Conversion' sparks Copt protest Archived 2006-06-26 at the Wayback Machine . BBC News Online December 9, 2004.

^ "Egypt" .

U.S. Department of State .

Archived from the original on May 25, 2019 . Retrieved May 5, 2015 .

^ "Christian minority under pressure in Egypt" .

BBC News . December 17, 2010.

Archived from the original on March 22, 2017 . Retrieved January 1, 2011 .

^ "Egypt: ex-kidnapper admits 'they get paid for every Coptic Christian girl they bring in' " . World Watch Monitor. 2017-09-14.

Archived from the original on 2018-09-13 . Retrieved 2017-12-25 .

^ Withnall, A. (20 October 2013).

"Britain's jails facing 'growing problem' of forced conversion to Islam, officers warn" .

The Independent . UK.

Archived from the original on 17 July 2018 . Retrieved 4 July 2017 .

^ Bloom, Colin.

"Does government 'do God?' An independent review into how government engages with faith" (PDF) .

gov.uk . Department for Levelling Up, Housing & Communities . Retrieved 26 April 2023 .

^ Cowan, Mark (June 6, 2007).

"Police guard girl 'forced to become Muslim' " . Birmingham Mail.

Archived from the original on 4 October 2013 . Retrieved 19 August 2013 .

^ " 'Forced Conversions' Myth Mongering By British Police" .

Islamic Human Rights Commission . Feb 25, 2007. Archived from the original on September 29, 2017 . Retrieved Jul 4, 2017 .

^ Muslim Council of Britain (8 March 2007), MCB calls for evidence of alleged 'forced conversions' , London, UK: Author, archived from the original on 29 September 2017 , retrieved 4 July 2017 ^ Sian, Katy P. (2011).

" 'Forced' conversions in the British Sikh diaspora" .

South Asian Popular Culture .

9 (2): 115– 130.

doi : 10.1080/14746681003798060 .

S2CID 54174845 .

Archived from the original on 2022-03-11 . Retrieved 2021-12-28 .

^ Sian, Katy P. (2013).

Unsettling Sikh and Muslim Conflict: Mistaken Identities, Forced Conversions, and Postcolonial Formations . Rowman & Littlefield. pp.

55– 71.

ISBN 978-0-7391-7874-4 . Retrieved 15 June 2013 .

^ Layton, Josh (December 3, 2018).

"Sikh girls 'abused by grooming gangs for decades' " .

BirminghamLive .

Archived from the original on March 11, 2021 . Retrieved April 12, 2020 .

^ Cockbain, Ella; Tufail, Waqas (2020).

"Failing victims, fuelling hate: Challenging the harms of the 'Muslim grooming gangs' narrative" (PDF) .

Race & Class .

61 (3): 3– 32.

doi : 10.1177/0306396819895727 .

S2CID 214197388 .

^ a b Jagbir Jhutti-Johal; Sunny Hundal (August 2019).

The changing nature of activism among Sikhs in the UK today . The Commission For Countering Extremism. University of Birmingham. p. 15.

WayBackMachine Link . Retrieved February 17th, 2020.

^ Flavius Josephus Antiquities 13.257–258 ^ Aristobulus ^ Harold W. Attridge, Gōhei Hata (eds).

Eusebius, Christianity, and Judaism Wayne State University Press, 1992: p. 387 ^ Maurice Sartre .

The Middle East Under Rome . Harvard University Press, 2005: p. 15 ^ William Horbury.

The Cambridge History of Judaism 2 Part Set: Volume 3, The Early Roman Period Cambridge University Press, 1999: p. 599 ^ Levin, Yigal (2020-09-24).

"The Religion of Idumea and Its Relationship to Early Judaism" .

Religions .

11 (10): 487.

doi : 10.3390/rel11100487 .

ISSN 2077-1444 .

^ "Historians back BBC over Jewish massacre claim | The Jewish Chronicle" . Thejc.com. 2009-09-18.

Archived from the original on 2020-12-04 . Retrieved 2014-06-06 .

^ G.W. Bowersock, The Rise and Fall of a Jewish Kingdom in Arabia , Institute for Advanced Study , Princeton, 2011, [4] Archived 2012-01-28 at the Wayback Machine ; The Adulis Throne , Oxford University Press, in press.

^ Bantu, Vince L. (2020-03-10).

A Multitude of All Peoples: Engaging Ancient Christianity's Global Identity . InterVarsity Press. p. 141.

ISBN 978-0-8308-2810-4 .

^ Jacques Ryckmans, La persécution des chrétiens himyarites au sixième siècle, Nederlands Historisch-Archaeologisch Inst. in het Nabije Oosten, 1956 pp 1–24 ^ Christian Julien Robin,'Arabia and Ethiopia,'in Scott Johnson (ed.) The Oxford Handbook of Late Antiquity, Oxford University Press, 2012, pp.247-333.p.282 ^ Burstein, Alon; Norwich, Liora (Summer 2018).

"From a Whisper to a Scream: The Politicization of The Ethiopian Community in Israel" .

Israel Studies .

23 (2). Indiana University Press: 25– 50.

doi : 10.2979/israelstudies.23.2.02 .

JSTOR 10.2979/israelstudies.23.2.02 . Retrieved 4 May 2025 .

^ Barhany, Beejhy (5 February 2013).

"Israel Must Apologize to Ethiopian Jews" . Forward . Retrieved 4 May 2025 .

^ Conversion, Forced . The Oxford Dictionary of the Jewish Religion. January 2011.

ISBN 978-0-19-973004-9 .

^ Rosen, Jeremy (2021-12-02).

"Forced Conversions" . Rabbi Jeremy Rosen.

^ a b Brezianu, Andrei (26 May 2010).

The A to Z of Moldova . Scarecrow Press. p. 98.

ISBN 978-0-8108-7211-0 .

Communist Atheism. Official doctrine of the Soviet regime, also called "scientific atheism." It was aggressively applied to Moldova, immediately after the 1940 annexation, when churches were profaned, clergy assaulted, and signs and public symbols of religion were prohibited, and it was applied again throughout the subsequent decades of the Soviet regime, after 1944. ... The St. Theodora Church in downtown Chişinău was converted into the city's Museum of Scientific Atheism, ^ Religion and the State in Russia and China: Suppression, Survival, and Revival, by Christopher Marsh, page 47. Continuum International Publishing Group, 2011.

^ Inside Central Asia: A Political and Cultural History, by Dilip Hiro. Penguin, 2009.

^ Adappur, Abraham (2000).

Religion and the Cultural Crisis in India and the West . Intercultural Publications.

ISBN 9788185574479 . Retrieved 14 July 2016 .

Forced Conversion under Atheistic Regimes: It might be added that the most modern example of forced "conversions" came not from any theocratic state, but from a professedly atheist government — that of the Soviet Union under the Communists.

^ Statement of Principles and Policy on Atheistic Education in Soviet Russia, translation from Russian, Stephen Schmidt, S.J., transcribed P. Legrand, page 3 ^ a b Geoffrey Blainey ; A Short History of Christianity ; Viking; 2011; p.494 ^ Martin Amis; Koba the Dread; Vintage Books; London; 2003; ISBN 1400032202 ; p.30-31 ^ Geoffrey Blainey; A Short History of Christianity; Viking; 2011; p.494" ^ Marsh, Christopher (20 January 2011).

Religion and the State in Russia and China: Suppression, Survival, and Revival . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 13.

ISBN 978-1-4411-0284-3 .

^ a b Blake, Jonathan S. (19 April 2014).

"By the Sword of God": Explaining Forced Religious Conversion .

Columbia University . pp. 15, 17.

^ Peter Hebblethwaite; Paul VI, the First Modern Pope; HarperCollins Religious; 1993; p.211 ^ Norman Davies; Rising '44: the Battle for Warsaw; Viking; 2003; p.566 & 568 ^ Geoffrey Blainey ; A Short History of Christianity ; Viking; 2011; p.508 ^ Franklin, Simon; Widdis, Emma (2 February 2006).

National Identity in Russian Culture .

Cambridge University Press . p. 104.

ISBN 978-0-521-02429-7 .

Churches, when not destroyed, might find themselves converted into museums of atheism.

^ Bevan, Robert (15 February 2016).

The Destruction of Memory: Architecture at War . Reaktion Books. p. 152.

ISBN 978-1-78023-608-7 .

Churches, synagogues, mosques and monasteries were shut down in the immediate wake of the Revolution. Many were converted to secular uses or Museums of Atheism (antichurches), whitewashed and their fittings removed.

^ a b McGrath 2006 , p. 46.

^ Froese, Paul (6 August 2008).

The Plot to Kill God: Findings from the Soviet Experiment in Secularization . University of California Press. p. 122.

ISBN 978-0-520-94273-8 .

Before 1937, the Soviet regime had closed thousands of churches and removed tens of thousands of religious leaders from positions of influence. By the midthirties, Soviet elites set out to conduct a mass liquidation of all religious organizations and leaders... officers in the League of Militant Atheists found themselves in a bind to explain the widespread persistence of religious belief in 1937.... The latest estimates indicate that thousands of individuals were executed for religious crimes and hundreds of thousands of religious believers were imprisoned in labor camps or psychiatric hospitals.

^ Baran, Emily (2011).

" "I saw the light": Former Protestant believer testimonials in the Soviet Union, 1957–1987" .

Cahiers du Monde Russe .

52 (1): 163– 184.

Atheist agitators hoped that such stories would help to convince believers and non-believers alike that the search for purpose in life could be solved with the discovery of atheism and communism. Yet some accounts suggest the conversion to militant atheism did not always end individuals' existential questions. To begin with, many former believers joined and left several religious organizations prior to renouncing faith altogether. Their life history could not be simply divided into two halves. One man recounted having joined the Baptists, Pentecostals, and the Seventh-Day Adventists before abandoning religion. Another man had been an Old Believer, Baptist, Pentecostal, and Witness. In other words, many believers had spent time as non-believers, but found life without religious faith somehow unsatisfying. As a result, some former believers admitted to having previously left religious organizations, only to return to them later. Many of them noted how after publicly denouncing Protestantism, they continued to receive visits from their former religious leaders asking them to reconsider. Indeed, atheist propaganda sometimes included complaints that once a believer had been convinced to leave his faith, atheist agitators lost interest in him, viewing the case as resolved.

^ Horne, Thomas Hartwell; Davidson, Samuel (21 November 2013).

An Introduction to the Critical Study and Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures . Cambridge University Press. p. 30.

ISBN 978-1-108-06772-0 .

^ Latreille, A. FRENCH REVOLUTION, New Catholic Encyclopedia v. 5, pp. 972–973 (Second Ed. 2002 Thompson/Gale) ISBN 0-7876-4004-2 ^ Spielvogel (2005) :549.

^ Tallet (1991) :1 ^ McGrath, Alistair E.

(2006).

The Twilight of Atheism: The Rise And Fall of Disbelief in the Modern World . Galilee. p. 45.

ISBN 978-0-385-50062-3 . Retrieved 9 May 2017 .

^ a b Geoffrey Blainey; A Short History of Christianity; Viking; 2011; p.508 ^ Encyclopædia Britannica Online – China: Religion ; accessed 10 November 2013 ^ Encyclopædia Britannica Online – China – History: Cultural Revolution Archived 2015-01-14 at the Wayback Machine ; accessed 10 November 2013 ^ China announces "civilizing" atheism drive in Tibet Archived 2023-05-25 at the Wayback Machine ; BBC; January 12, 1999 ^ a b Beydoun, Khaled A.

"For China, Islam is a 'mental illness' that needs to be 'cured' " .

Al Jazeera .

Archived from the original on 10 December 2018 . Retrieved 10 December 2018 .

^ a b c Soberanes Fernandez, Jose Luis, Mexico and the 1981 United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief Archived 2012-10-19 at the Wayback Machine , pp. 437–438 nn. 7–8, BYU Law Review, June 2002 ^ Haas, Ernst B., Nationalism, Liberalism, and Progress: The dismal fate of new nations , Cornell Univ. Press 2000 ^ Cronon, E. David "American Catholics and Mexican Anticlericalism, 1933–1936", pp. 205–208, Mississippi Valley Historical Review, XLV, Sept. 1948 ^ a b c "1917 Constitution of Mexico" . Archived from the original on 2007-03-03 . Retrieved 2007-03-03 .

^ "THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE MARTIN-DEL-CAMPOs Part II" . myheritage.es.

^ a b Joes, Anthony James Resisting Rebellion: The History And Politics of Counterinsurgency p. 70, (2006 University Press of Kentucky) ISBN 0-8131-9170-X ^ Tuck, Jim THE CRISTERO REBELLION – PART 1 Archived 2008-12-21 at the Wayback Machine Mexico Connect 1996 ^ David A. Shirk (2005).

Mexico's New Politics .

Lynne Rienner Publishers .

ISBN 978-1-58826-270-7 .

^ Calles, Plutarco Elías Archived 2015-02-07 at the Wayback Machine The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition. 2001–05 Columbia University Press.

^ a b c d e f Van Hove, Brian (1996), Blood-Drenched Altars: Baltimore's Archbishop Michael Joseph Curley, Oklahoma's Bishop Francis Clement Kelley and the Mexican Affair: 1934–1936 , Eternal Word Television Network , archived from the original on 9 November 2017 , retrieved 9 May 2017 ^ Scheina, Robert L.

Latin America's Wars: The Age of the Caudillo, 1791–1899 p. 33 (2003
Brassey's) ISBN 1-57488-452-2 ^ Ruiz, Ramón Eduardo Triumphs and Tragedy: A History of the Mexican People p.393 (1993 W. W. Norton & Company) ISBN 0-393-31066-3 ^ Kiernan, Ben (2008) Kiernan, Ben (2008) [5] The Pol Pot Regime: Race, Power, and Genocide in Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge, 1975–79. Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-14434-5 ^ Harris, Ian (2005) Buddhism under Pol Pot. Documentation Center of Cambodia.

^ Chandler, David (1999).

Voices from S-21: Terror and History in Pol Pot’s Secret Prison.

University of California Press .

^ a b Harris, Ian (2007) Cambodian Buddhism: History and Practice.

University of Hawaii Press.

ISBN 978-0-8248-2978-0 ^ Edwards, Penny (2007) Cambodge: The Cultivation of a Nation, 1860–1945.

University of Hawaii Press .

ISBN 978-0-8248-3188-2 ^ Vickery, Michael (1984) Cambodia 1975–1982. South End Press.

v t e Religious persecution and discrimination By group Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Methods Censorship Blasphemy law Blood libel Communal violence Cultural genocide Deprogramming Desecration Domicide Discrimination Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Extrajudicial killing Extrajudicial punishment Exclusivism Forced conversion Forced displacement Hate crime Iconoclasm Intolerance Pogrom Police Political violence Population cleansing Population transfer Sectarian violence Social cleansing Segregation State atheism State religion Terrorism Violence War Events Golden calf massacre (c.1250 BC) Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire (64–313) Persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire (c. 324–c. 491) Decline of Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent (c.550–c. 1200) Yellow Turban Rebellion (c.184–c. 205) Battle of Tours (732) Rhineland massacres (1096) Jerusalem massacre (1099) Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent (643–1526) Inquisition (1184–1908) Massacre at Ayyadieh (1191) Northern Crusades (12th–16th cent.) Crusades against Christians (13th–15th cent.) Forced conversions of Muslims in Spain (1500–1526) European wars of religion (1522–1712) Ottoman–Habsburg wars (1526–1791) Goa Inquisition (1561–1812) French Wars of Religion (1562–1598) Expulsion of the Moriscos (1609–1614) Test Acts (1673–1829) Persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction (1683–1922) Christianization of the Sámi people (1700s) French Revolutionary dechristianisation (1789–1801) Utah War (1857–1858) 1860 Mount Lebanon civil war (1860) Circassian genocide (1864) Dungan Revolt (1862–1877) Adana massacre (1909) Massacres of Albanians in the Balkan Wars (1912–1913) Greek genocide (1913–1922) Pontic Greek genocide Assyrian genocide (1914–1924) Armenian genocide (1915–1923) Persecution of Christians in the Eastern Bloc (1917–1990) Soviet persecution (1922–1991) 1917–1921 1921–1928 1928–1941 1958–1964 1970–1987 legislation Šahovići massacre (1924) White Terror (Spain) (1936–1975) Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses (1933) The Holocaust (1939–1945) Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia (1941–1945) Communist Polish persecution (1945–1989) Communist Romanian persecution (1945–1989) Noakhali riots (1946) Direct Action Day (1946) 1946 Bihar riots (1946) Rawalpindi massacres (1947) Persecution of Hindus in Pakistan (1947–ongoing) Violence against Muslims in India (1947–ongoing) Violence against Hindus in independent India (1947–ongoing) 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight (1948) Jewish exodus from the Muslim world (1948–1980) Antireligious campaigns in China (1949–ongoing) Persecution of Tibetans (1950–ongoing) Exodus of Turks from Bulgaria (1950) Religious violence in Nigeria (1953–ongoing) Istanbul pogrom (1955) Persecution of Papuans (1962–ongoing) Buddhist crisis (1963) Huế Phật Đản shootings (1963) Thích Quảng Đức (1963) Xá Lợi Pagoda raids (1963) Cultural Revolution (1966–1976) Four Olds (1966) Famen Temple (1966) Bangladesh genocide (1971) Persecution of Hindus in Bangladesh (1971–ongoing) Lebanese Civil War (1975–1990) Cambodian genocide (1975–1979) East Timor genocide (1975–1999) 1984 anti-Sikh riots (1984) Revival Process (1984–1989) 1989 expulsion of Turks from Bulgaria (1989) Exodus of Kashmiri Hindus (1990) Yugoslav Wars (1991–2001) Ethnic cleansing in the Bosnian War (1992–1996) Bosnian genocide (1995) War crimes in the Kosovo War (1999) Walisongo school massacre (2000) Kosheh massacres (2000) September 11 attacks (2001) 2002 Gujarat riots (2002) South Thailand insurgency (2004–ongoing) Boko Haram insurgency (2009–ongoing) Maspero demonstrations (2011) Attacks by Islamic extremists in Bangladesh (2013–2016) Yazidi genocide (2014–2017) Genocide of Christians by ISIL (2014–ongoing) Iraqi Turkmen genocide (2014–2017) Persecution of Uyghurs in China (2014–ongoing) Rohingya genocide (2016–ongoing) Christchurch mosque shootings (2019) 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings (2019) 2020 Delhi riots (2020) 2024 Istanbul church shooting Crocus City Hall attack (2024) Mar Elias Church attack (2025) Religion v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Forced_conversion&oldid=1306041542 " Categories : Forced religious conversion Christianization Islamization Persecution by atheist states Religious policy Genocide Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 errors: ISBN date All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from February 2024 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2022 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from November 2013 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 15:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Forced conversion 17 languages Add topic

