Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Individual exclusion 2 Community exclusion 3 Contributors Toggle Contributors subsection 3.1 Global and structural 3.2 Unemployment 3.3 Religion 3.4 Sport 4 Consequences Toggle Consequences subsection 4.1 Health 4.2 Economics 5 In philosophy 6 Social inclusion 7 In law 8 See also 9 References 10 Bibliography 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Social exclusion 43 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia IsiXhosa Italiano עברית Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "Marginalisation" redirects here. For the concept in probability, see Marginal distribution .

Form of social disadvantage and relegation to the fringe of society This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( July 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Community Academic studies Social sciences Community studies Community practice Community psychology Social work Computational sociology Cultural anthropology Internet studies Philosophy of social science Rural sociology Social geography Social philosophy Sociocultural evolution Urban planning Key concepts Affinity (sociology) Collectivism and individualism Community engagement Community education Community cohesion Community of interest Community practice Community of practice Community of place Community service Communitarianism Community politics Group cohesiveness Group (sociology) Group dynamics Imagined community Organization Prosocial behavior Sense of community Small-group communication Sobornost Social alienation Social capital Social death Social exclusion Socialization Social rejection Social support Solidarity (sociology) Community development Community-based management Community building Community economic development Community development planning Community organizing See also Outline Category:Community building Category:Community development Category:Localism (politics) v t e Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Social exclusion or social marginalisation is the social disadvantage and relegation to the fringe of society . It is a term that has been used widely in Europe and was first used in France in the late 20th century.

[ 1 ] In the EU context, the European Commission defines it as "a situation whereby a person is prevented (or excluded) from contributing to and benefiting from economic and social progress" .

[ 2 ] It is used across disciplines including education , sociology , psychology , healthcare , politics and economics .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Social exclusion is the process in which individuals are blocked from (or denied full access to) various rights , opportunities and resources that are normally available to members of a different group, and which are fundamental to social integration and observance of human rights within that particular group [ 5 ] (e.g.

due process ).

Alienation or disenfranchisement resulting from social exclusion can be connected to a person's social class , race, skin color, religious affiliation, ethnic origin, caste , educational status , childhood relationships, [ 6 ] living standards , political opinions, and/or appearance. Such exclusionary forms of discrimination may also apply to disabled people , minorities , for LGBTQ+ people, drug users , [ 7 ] institutional care leavers, [ 8 ] the elderly and the young . Anyone who appears to deviate in any way from perceived norms of a population may thereby become subject to coarse or subtle forms of social exclusion.

The outcome of social exclusion is that affected individuals or communities are prevented from participating fully in the economic, social, and political life of the society in which they live.

[ 9 ] This may result in resistance in the form of demonstrations, protests or lobbying from the excluded people.

[ 10 ] The concept of social exclusion has led to the researcher's conclusion that in many European countries the impact of social disadvantages, that influence the well-being of all people, including with special needs, has an increasingly negative impact.

[ 11 ] Most of the characteristics listed in this article are present together in studies of social exclusion, due to exclusion's multidimensionality.

Another way of articulating the definition of social exclusion is as follows: Social exclusion is a multidimensional process of progressive social rupture, detaching groups and individuals from social relations and institutions and preventing them from full participation in the normal, normatively prescribed activities of the society in which they live.

[ 12 ] In an alternative conceptualization, social exclusion theoretically emerges at the individual or group level on four correlated dimensions: insufficient access to social rights , material deprivation, limited social participation and a lack of normative integration. It is then regarded as the combined result of personal risk factors (age, gender, race); macro-societal changes (demographic, economic and labor market developments, technological innovation, the evolution of social norms); government legislation and social policy; and the actual behavior of businesses, administrative organisations and fellow citizens.

[ 13 ] In some contexts social exclusion can have positive effects.

[ 14 ] Individual exclusion [ edit ] "The marginal man...is one whom fate has condemned to live in two societies and in two, not merely different but antagonistic cultures....his mind is the crucible in which two different and refractory cultures may be said to melt and, either wholly or in part, fuse." [ 15 ] Social exclusion at the individual level results in an individual's exclusion from meaningful participation in society.

[ 16 ] An example is the exclusion of single mothers from the welfare system prior to welfare reforms of the 1900s. The modern welfare system is based on the concept of entitlement to the basic means of being a productive member of society both as an organic function of society and as compensation for the socially useful labor provided. A single mother's contribution to society is not based on formal employment , but on the notion that provision of welfare for children is a necessary social expense. In some career contexts, caring work is devalued and motherhood is seen as a barrier to employment.

[ 17 ] Single mothers were previously marginalized in spite of their significant role in the socializing of children due to views that an individual can only contribute meaningfully to society through "gainful" employment as well as a cultural bias against unwed mothers. When the father's sole task was seen as the breadwinner, his marginalization was primarily a function of class condition. Solo fatherhood brings additional trials due to society being less accepting of males 'getting away with' not working and the general invisibility/lack of acknowledgment of single fathers in society. Acknowledgment of the needs participatory fathers may have can be found by examining the changes from the original clinical report on the father's role published by the American Academy of Pediatrics in May 2004.

[ 18 ] Eight week paternity leave is a good example of one social change. Child health care providers have an opportunity to have a greater influence on the child and family structure by supporting fathers and enhancing a father's involvement.

[ 19 ] More broadly, many women face social exclusion. Moosa-Mitha discusses the Western feminist movement as a direct reaction to the marginalization of white women in society.

[ 20 ] Women were excluded from the labor force and their work in the home was not valued. Feminists argued that men and women should equally participate in the labor force, in the public and private sector, and in the home. They also focused on labor laws to increase access to employment as well as to recognize child-rearing as a valuable form of labor. In some places today, women are still marginalized from executive positions and continue to earn less than men in upper management positions.

[ 21 ] Another example of individual marginalization is the exclusion of individuals with disabilities from the labor force. Grandz discusses an employer's viewpoint about hiring individuals living with disabilities as jeopardizing productivity , increasing the rate of absenteeism , and creating more accidents in the workplace.

[ 22 ] Cantor also discusses employer concern about the excessively high cost of accommodating people with disabilities.

[ 22 ] The marginalization of individuals with disabilities is prevalent today, despite the legislation intended to prevent it in most western countries, and the academic achievements, skills and training of many disabled people.

[ 22 ] There are also exclusions of sexual minorities because of their sexual orientation , gender identity , and/or sexual characteristics . The Yogyakarta Principles require that the states and communities abolish any stereotypes about LGBT people as well as stereotyped gender roles .

"Isolation is common to almost every vocational, religious or cultural group of a large city. Each develops its own sentiments, attitudes, codes, even its own words, which are at best only partially intelligible to others." [ 23 ] The popularity of a TikTok trend in which men call their friends to say good night has been attributed to a widespread longing for platonic connection.

[ 24 ] In a 2021 US survey, less than one-third of men said they had a private conversation, involving sharing feelings with a friend, within a week. Just under one-half of women reported doing so.

[ 24 ] Community exclusion [ edit ] Many communities experience social exclusion, such as racial (e.g.

black ), caste (e.g.

untouchables or dalits in some regions in India), and economic (e.g.

Romani ) communities.

One example is the Aboriginal community in Australia. The marginalization of Aboriginal communities is a product of colonization . As a result of colonialism , Aboriginal communities lost their land, were forced into destitute areas, lost their sources of livelihood, were excluded from the labor market and were subjected to widespread unpunished massacres . Additionally, Aboriginal communities lost their culture and values through forced assimilation and lost their rights in society.

[ 25 ] Today, various Aboriginal communities continue to be marginalized from society due to the development of practices, policies and programs that, according to J. Yee, "met the needs of white people and not the needs of the marginalized groups themselves".

[ 26 ] Yee also connects marginalization to minority communities, when describing the concept of whiteness as maintaining and enforcing dominant norms and discourse.

[ 26 ] Poor people living in run-down council estates and areas with high crime can be locked into social deprivation .

[ 27 ] Contributors [ edit ] Social exclusion has many contributors. Major contributors include race, income, employment status, social class, geographic location; personal habits, appearance, or interests (i.e., a favorite hobby, sports team, or music genre); education, religion, and political affiliation.

Global and structural [ edit ] Globalization (global capitalism), immigration, social welfare, and policy are broader social structures that have the potential to contribute negatively to one's access to resources and services, resulting in the social exclusion of individuals and groups. Similarly, increasing use of information technology and the company outsourcing have contributed to job insecurity and a widening gap between the rich and the poor. Globalization sets forth a decrease in the role of the state with an increase in support from various "corporate sectors resulting in gross inequalities, injustices and marginalization of various vulnerable groups" (p. 1).

[ 28 ] Companies are outsourcing, jobs are lost, the cost of living continues to rise, and the land is being expropriated by large companies. Material goods are made in large abundances and sold at cheaper costs, while in India for example, the poverty line is lowered in order to mask the number of individuals who are actually living in poverty as a result of globalization. Globalization and structural forces aggravate poverty and continue to push individuals to the margins of society, while governments and large corporations do not address the issues (George, P, SK8101, lecture, October 9, 2007).

Certain language and the meaning attached to language can cause universalizing discourses that are influenced by the Western world, which is what Sewpaul (2006) describes as the "potential to dilute or even annihilate local cultures and traditions and to deny context-specific realities" (p. 421). What Sewpaul (2006) is implying is that the effect of dominant global discourses can cause individual and cultural displacement, as well as sex safety are jeopardized (p. 422). Insecurity and fear of an unknown future and instability can result in displacement, exclusion, and forced assimilation into the dominant group. For many, it further pushes them to the margins of society or enlists new members to the outskirts because of global-capitalism and dominant discourses (Sewpaul, 2006).

With the prevailing notion of globalization, we now see the rise of immigration as the world gets smaller and smaller with millions of individuals relocating each year. This is not without hardship and struggle of what a newcomer thought was going to be a new life with new opportunities. Immigration has had a strong link to the access of welfare support programs.

[ 29 ] Newcomers are constantly bombarded with the inability to access a country's resources because they are seen as "undeserving foreigners" (p. 132). With this comes a denial of access to public housing , health care benefits, employment support services, and social security benefits.

[ 29 ] Newcomers are seen as undeserving, or that they must prove their entitlement in order to gain access to basic support necessities. It is clear that individuals are exploited and marginalized within the country they have emigrated.

[ 29 ] Welfare states and social policies can also exclude individuals from basic necessities and support programs. Welfare payments were proposed to assist individuals in accessing a small amount of material wealth (Young, 2000). Young (2000) further discusses how "the provision of the welfare itself produces new injustice by depriving those dependent on it of rights and freedoms that others have...marginalization is unjust because it blocks the opportunity to exercise capacities in socially defined and recognized way" (p. 41). There is the notion that by providing a minimal amount of welfare support, an individual will be free from marginalization. In fact, welfare support programs further lead to injustices by restricting certain behaviour, as well the individual is mandated to other agencies. The individual is forced into a new system of rules while facing social stigma and stereotypes from the dominant group in society, further marginalizing and excluding individuals (Young, 2000). Thus, social policy and welfare provisions reflect the dominant notions in society by constructing and reinforcing categories of people and their needs. It ignores the unique-subjective human essence, further continuing the cycle of dominance.

[ 30 ] Unemployment [ edit ] See also: Blacklisting and Involuntary unemployment Whilst recognising the multi-dimensionality of exclusion, policy work undertaken in the European Union focused [ citation needed ] on unemployment as a key cause of, or at least correlating with, social exclusion. This is because, in modern societies, paid work is not only the principal source of income with which to buy services but is also the fount of individuals' identity and feeling of self-worth. Most people's social networks and a sense of embeddedness in society also revolve around their work. Many of the indicators of extreme social exclusion, such as poverty and homelessness, depend on monetary income which is normally derived from work. Social exclusion can be a possible result of long-term unemployment, especially in countries with weak welfare safety nets.

[ 31 ] Much policy to reduce exclusion thus focuses on the labour market: On the one hand, to make individuals at risk of exclusion more attractive to employers, i.e. more "employable".

On the other hand, to encourage (and/or oblige) employers to be more inclusive in their employment policies.

The EU's EQUAL Community Initiative investigated ways to increase the inclusiveness of the labor market. Work on social exclusion more broadly is carried out through the Open Method of Coordination (OMC) among the Member State governments. The United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 10 is also an example of global initiatives aimed at promoting social inclusion for all by 2030.

[ 32 ] Religion [ edit ] See also: Shunning § in religion , Apostasy , Exclusivism § Religious exclusivism , and Normalization of antisemitism Some religious traditions recommend excommunication of individuals said to deviate from religious teaching, and in some instances shunning by family members. Some religious organizations permit the censure of critics.

Across societies, individuals and communities can be socially excluded on the basis of their religious beliefs. Social hostility against religious minorities and communal violence occur in areas where governments do not have policies restricting the religious practise of minorities. A study by the Pew Research Center on international religious freedom found that [ 33 ] [ 34 ] 61% of countries have social hostilities that tend to target religious minorities.

[ 35 ] The five highest social hostility scores were for Pakistan , India , Sri Lanka , Iraq , and Bangladesh .

[ 36 ] In 2015, Pew published that social hostilities declined in 2013, but harassment of Jews increased.

[ 35 ] “I h8 Jews”, written in the sand on a New Jersey beach and texted to a group chat of high school students, led to a state investigation described in the New York Times .

[ 37 ] The article noted that "schools often treat bias incidents as one-offs, minimizing or even ignoring them", according to a 2019 report by the Southern Poverty Law Center .

[ 38 ] Anti-Jewish hate crimes in the US were the largest category of hate crimes between October 2023 and December 2023, at 971 crimes.

[ 39 ] The shift of anti-Jewish hate from fringe to mainstream has been described as ' normalization of antisemitism '.

[ 40 ] Sport [ edit ] Parts of 2024 Summer Olympics opening ceremony have been criticized by some as divisive due to singling out one particular religion (Christianity).

[ 41 ] Consequences [ edit ] Health [ edit ] See also: Social determinants of health , Social determinants of health in poverty , and Social determinants of mental health In gay men , results of psycho-emotional damage from marginalization from a heteronormative society include suicide and drug addiction.

[ 42 ] Scientists have been studying the impact of racism on health .

Amani Nuru-Jeter , a social epidemiologist at the University of California, Berkeley and other doctors have been hypothesizing that exposure to chronic stress may be one way racism contributes to health disparities between racial groups.

[ 43 ] Arline Geronimus , a research professor at the University of Michigan Institute for Social Research and a professor at the School of Public Health, and her colleagues found that psychosocial stress associated with living in extreme poverty can cause early onset of age-related diseases.

[ 44 ] The 2015 study titled, "Race-Ethnicity, Poverty, Urban Stressors, and Telomere Length in a Detroit Community-based Sample" was conducted in order to determine the impact of living conditions on health and was performed by a multi-university team of social scientists, cellular biologists and community partners, including the Healthy Environments Partnership (HEP) to measure the telomere length of poor and moderate-income people of White, African-American and Mexican race.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] In 2006, there was research focused on possible connections between exclusion and brain function.

[ 46 ] Studies published by both the University of Georgia and San Diego State University found that exclusion can lead to diminished brain functioning and poor decision making.

[ 46 ] Such studies corroborate with earlier beliefs of sociologists. The effect of social exclusion have been hypothesized in various past research studies to correlate with such things as substance abuse and addiction, and crime.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] Economics [ edit ] The problem of social exclusion is usually tied to that of equal opportunity , as some people are more subject to such exclusion than others.

Marginalisation of certain groups is a problem in many economically more developed countries where the majority of the population enjoys considerable economic and social opportunities.

[ 49 ] In philosophy [ edit ] The marginal, the processes of marginalisation, etc. bring specific interest in postmodern and post-colonial philosophy and social studies.

[ 50 ] Postmodernism question the "center" about its authenticity and postmodern sociology and cultural studies research marginal cultures, behaviours, societies, the situation of the marginalized individual, etc.

[ 50 ] Social inclusion [ edit ] See also: Inclusivism Social inclusion is the converse of social exclusion. As the World Bank states, social inclusion is the process of improving the ability, opportunity, and worthiness of people, disadvantaged on the basis of their identity, to take part in society.

[ 51 ] The World Bank 's 2019 World Development Report on The Changing Nature of Work [ 52 ] suggests that enhanced social protection and better investments in human capital improve equality of opportunity and social inclusion. Social inclusion can be measured individually.

[ 53 ] Social Inclusion ministers have been appointed, and special units established, in a number of jurisdictions around the world. The first Minister for Social Inclusion was Premier of South Australia Mike Rann , who took the portfolio in 2004. Based on the UK's Social Exclusion Unit , established by Prime Minister Tony Blair in 1997, Rann established the Social Inclusion Initiative in 2002. It was headed by Monsignor David Cappo and was serviced by a unit within the department of Premier and Cabinet. Cappo sat on the executive committee of the South Australian Cabinet and was later appointed Social Inclusion Commissioner with wide powers to address social disadvantage. Cappo was allowed to roam across agencies given that most social disadvantage has multiple causes necessitating a "joined up" rather than a single agency response.

[ 54 ] The Initiative drove a big investment by the South Australian Government in strategies to combat homelessness , including establishing Common Ground, building high quality inner city apartments for "rough sleeping" homeless people, the Street to Home initiative [ 55 ] and the ICAN flexible learning program designed to improve school retention rates. It also included major funding to revamp mental health services following Cappo's "Stepping Up" report, which focused on the need for community and intermediate levels of care [ 56 ] and an overhaul of disability services.

[ 57 ] In 2007, Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd appointed Julia Gillard as the nation's first Social Inclusion Minister .

[ 58 ] In Japan , the concept and term "social inclusion" went through a number of changes over time and eventually became incorporated in community-based activities under the names hōsetsu (包摂) and hōkatsu (包括), such as in the "Community General Support Centres" ( chiiki hōkatsu shien sentā 地域包括支援センター) and "Community-based Integrated Care System" ( chiiki hōkatsu kea shisutemu 地域包括ケアシステム).

[ 59 ] One may explore its implications for social work practice. Mullaly (2007) describes how "the personal is political" and the need for recognizing that social problems are indeed connected with larger structures in society, causing various forms of oppression amongst individuals resulting in marginalization.

[ 60 ] It is also important for the social worker to recognize the intersecting nature of oppression. A non-judgmental and unbiased attitude is necessary on the part of the social worker. The worker may begin to understand oppression and marginalization as a systemic problem, not the fault of the individual.

[ 60 ] Working under an anti-oppression perspective would then allow the social worker to understand the lived, subjective experiences of the individual, as well as their cultural, historical and social background. The worker should recognize the individual as political in the process of becoming a valuable member of society and the structural factors that contribute to oppression and marginalization (Mullaly, 2007).

[ 60 ] Social workers must take a firm stance on naming and labeling global forces that impact individuals and communities who are then left with no support, leading to marginalization or further marginalization from the society they once knew (George, P, SK8101, lecture, October 9, 2007).

The social worker should be constantly reflexive , work to raise the consciousness, empower , and understand the lived subjective realities of individuals living in a fast-paced world, where fear and insecurity constantly subjugate the individual from the collective whole, perpetuating the dominant forces, while silencing the oppressed.

[ 61 ] Some individuals and groups who are not professional social workers build relationships with marginalized persons by providing relational care and support, for example, through homeless ministry . These relationships validate the individuals who are marginalized and provide them a meaningful contact with the mainstream.

In law [ edit ] There are countries, Italy for example, that have a legal concept of social exclusion . In Italy, " esclusione sociale " is defined as poverty combined with social alienation, by the statute n. 328 (11-8-2000), that instituted a state investigation commission named " Commissione di indagine sull'Esclusione Sociale " (CIES) to make an annual report to the government on legally expected issues of social exclusion.

[ 62 ] The Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, a document on international human rights instruments affirms that " extreme poverty and social exclusion constitute a violation of human dignity and that urgent steps are necessary to achieve better knowledge of extreme poverty and its causes, including those related to the program of development, in order to promote the human rights of the poorest, and to put an end to extreme poverty and social exclusion and promote the enjoyment of the fruits of social progress. It is essential for States to foster participation by the poorest people in the decision making process by the community in which they live, the promotion of human rights and efforts to combat extreme poverty." [ 63 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Ageism Antisemitism Anti-Zionism Apartheid Basic income Blacklisting Cancel culture Closure (sociology) Cordon sanitaire (international relations) Cordon sanitaire (politics) Distribution of wealth Exclusionism Guaranteed minimum income Environmental racism Hate speech Heterosexism Homophobia In-group favoritism Isolation to facilitate abuse Korenizatsiia List of banned political parties Lumpenproletariat Ostracism Peer pressure Poverty Racism Relational mobility Second-class citizen Sex segregation Silent treatment Social alienation Social control Social death Social firm Social invisibility Social rejection Social stigma Social vulnerability The Disinformation Project Transport divide Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action Viewpoint discrimination Yogyakarta Principles Youth exclusion References [ edit ] ^ Silver H (1994).

"Social Exclusion and Social Solidarity: Three Paradigms" .

International Labour Review .

133 ( 5– 6): 531– 78.

^ "social exclusion - European Commission" .

home-affairs.ec.europa.eu . Retrieved 2024-04-10 .

^ Peace R (2001).

"Social exclusion: A concept in need of definition?" .

Social Policy Journal of New Zealand : 17– 36.

^ O'Donnell P, O'Donovan D, Elmusharaf K (February 2018).

"Measuring social exclusion in healthcare settings: a scoping review" .

International Journal for Equity in Health .

17 (1) 15.

doi : 10.1186/s12939-018-0732-1 .

PMC 5796599 .

PMID 29391016 .

^ "About" .

Institute on Public Safety and Social Justice .

Adler University . 26 February 2020.

^ "The Seeds of Exclusion (2008)" .

The Salvation Army . Archived from the original on 27 August 2008 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ "Social exclusion and reintegration" . Archived from the original on 2014-10-29 . Retrieved 2014-12-29 .

^ "The statistics" . Archived from the original on 2009-11-15.

^ Young IM (2000). "Five faces of oppression.". In Adams M (ed.).

Readings for Diversity and Social Justice . New York: Routledge. pp.

35– 49.

^ Walsh T (2006).

"A right to inclusion? Homelessness, human rights, and social exclusion" .

Australian Journal of Human Rights .

12 (1): 185– 204.

doi : 10.1080/1323238x.2006.11910818 .

S2CID 150777458 .

^ Marsela R (July 2014).

"Social inclusion and inclusive education" .

Academicus International Scientific Journal .

10 : 181– 191.

doi : 10.7336/academicus.2014.10.12 – via ResearchGate.

^ Hilary Silver, Social Exclusion: Comparative Analysis of Europe and Middle East Youth, Middle East Youth Initiative Working Paper (September 2007), p.15 [ usurped ] ^ Joel-Gijsbers G, Vrooman C (2007).

Explaining Social Exclusion; A Theoretical Model tested in The Netherlands .

The Netherlands Institute for Social Research/SCP . Archived from the original on 2019-05-25 . Retrieved 2019-09-10 .

ISBN 978 90 377 0325 2 ; Vrooman JC, Hoff SJ (June 2013). "The Disadvantaged Among the Dutch: A Survey Approach to the Multidimensional Measurement of Social Exclusion".

Social Indicators Research .

113 (3): 1261– 1287.

doi : 10.1007/s11205-012-0138-1 .

ISSN 0303-8300 .

S2CID 144759218 .

^ Felix CV (24 February 2024).

"A Critique of the Inclusion/Exclusion Dichotomy" .

Philosophies .

9 (2): 30.

doi : 10.3390/philosophies9020030 .

ISSN 2409-9287 .

^ Park RE (1937). "Cultural Conflict and the Marginal Man". In Stonequist EV (ed.).

The Marginal Man . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.

^ Walsh T (December 2006).

"A right to inclusion? Homelessness, human rights and social exclusion" (PDF) .

Australian Journal of Human Rights .

12 : 185– 204.

doi : 10.1080/1323238x.2006.11910818 .

S2CID 150777458 .

^ Lessa I (February 2006). "Discursive struggles within social welfare: Restaging teen motherhood".

The British Journal of Social Work .

36 (2): 283– 298.

doi : 10.1093/bjsw/bch256 .

^ Coleman WL, Garfield C (May 2004). "Fathers and pediatricians: enhancing men's roles in the care and development of their children".

Pediatrics .

113 (5): 1406– 1411.

doi : 10.1542/peds.113.5.1406 .

PMID 15121965 .

^ Yogman M, Garfield CF (July 2016).

"Fathers' Roles in the Care and Development of Their Children: The Role of Pediatricians" .

Pediatrics .

138 (1) e20161128.

doi : 10.1542/peds.2016-1128 .

PMID 27296867 .

^ Moosa-Mitha M (2005). "Situating anti-oppressive theories within critical and difference-centred perspectives.". In Brown L, Strega S (eds.).

Research as Resistance . Toronto: Canadian Scholars' Press. pp.

37– 72.

^ "Did You Know That Women Are Still Paid Less Than Men?" .

whitehouse.gov . Retrieved February 7, 2013 – via National Archives .

^ a b c Leslie DR, Leslie K, Murphy M (2003). "Inclusion by design: The challenge for social work in workplace accommodation for people with disabilities.". In Shera W (ed.).

Emerging perspectives on anti-oppression practice . Toronto: Canadian Scholar's Press. pp.

157– 169.

^ Thrasher F (1927).

The Gang: A Study of 1,313 Gangs in Chicago . University of Chicago Press.

^ a b Cherelus G (2025-05-24).

"On TikTok, Men Are Calling Each Other to Say Good Night" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2025-06-04 .

^ Baskin C (2003). "Structural social work as seen from an Aboriginal Perspective.". In Shera W (ed.).

Emerging perspectives on anti-oppressive practice . Toronto: Canadian Scholar's Press. pp.

65– 78.

^ a b Yee J (2005). "Critical anti-racism praxis: The concept of whiteness implicated.". In Hick S, Fook J, Pozzuto R (eds.).

Social work, a critical turn . Toronto: Thompson. pp.

87– 104.

^ Searing H.

"Social Exclusion: A Social Worker's View" .

^ Alphonse M, George P, Moffat K (March 2008). "Redefining social work standards in the context of globalization: Lessons from India".

International Social Work .

51 (2): 145– 158.

doi : 10.1177/0020872807085855 .

^ a b c Ferguson I, Lavalette M, Whitmore E (2005).

Globalization, Global Justice and Social Work . London and New York: Routledge Taylor & Francis Group.

^ Wilson A, Beresford P (2000). "Anti-oppressive practice': Emancipation or appropriation?".

British Journal of Social Work .

30 (5): 553– 573.

doi : 10.1093/bjsw/30.5.553 .

^ Furlong A (2013).

Youth Studies: An Introduction . Routledge. p. 31.

^ "Goal 10 targets" .

UNDP . Archived from the original on 2020-11-27 . Retrieved 2020-09-23 .

^ "Global Restrictions on Religion (Executive summary)" . The Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life. December 2009 . Retrieved 29 December 2009 .

^ "Global Restrictions on Religion (Full report)" (PDF) . The Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life. December 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 12 September 2013 .

^ a b "Latest Trends in Religious Restrictions and Hostilities" .

Pew Forum . 26 Feb 2015.

^ "Table: Social Hostilities Index by country" (PDF) .

Pew Research Center . 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-10-05.

^ Otterman S (2020-03-04).

"She Was Excited for a New School. Then the Anti-Semitic 'Jokes' Started" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2025-01-01 .

^ "Hate at School" .

Southern Poverty Law Center . 2019-05-02 . Retrieved 2025-01-01 .

^ "Hate Crime in the United States Incident Analysis" .

FBI Crime Data Explorer . Retrieved 2025-01-02 .

^ Adediran K (2022-12-07).

"The Normalization Of Antisemitism" .

Exploring Hate . Retrieved 2025-02-14 .

^ "Drag performance resembling Last Supper at Olympic opening ceremony rankles conservatives" .

NBC News . 27 July 2024 . Retrieved 28 July 2024 .

^ Crossley ML (June 2004). "Making sense of 'barebacking': gay men's narratives, unsafe sex and the 'resistance habitus' ".

The British Journal of Social Psychology .

43 (Pt 2): 225– 244.

doi : 10.1348/0144666041501679 .

PMID 15285832 .

^ "Scientists Start To Tease Out The Subtler Ways Racism Hurts Health" .

NPR.org . Retrieved 2018-01-30 .

^ a b Geronimus AT, Pearson JA, Linnenbringer E, Schulz AJ, Reyes AG, Epel ES, et al. (June 2015).

"Race-Ethnicity, Poverty, Urban Stressors, and Telomere Length in a Detroit Community-based Sample" .

Journal of Health and Social Behavior .

56 (2): 199– 224.

doi : 10.1177/0022146515582100 .

PMC 4621968 .

PMID 25930147 .

^ "Biological process linked to early aging, death among poor in Detroit" .

University of Michigan Institute for Social Research . Retrieved 2018-01-30 .

^ a b "Study: Social exclusion changes brain function, can lead to poor decision-making" .

UGA Today . University of Georgia. 2006-11-20 . Retrieved 2018-11-02 .

^ Seddon T (2005-08-30).

"Drugs, Crime and Social Exclusion" .

The British Journal of Criminology .

46 (4): 680– 703.

doi : 10.1093/bjc/azi079 .

ISSN 1464-3529 .

^ Townsend M (2017-11-12).

"Britain's socially excluded '10 times more likely to die early' " .

the Guardian . Retrieved 2018-11-02 .

^ Christiano T (1996).

The Rule of the Many: Fundamental Issues in Democratic Theory . Boulder: Westview Press.

^ a b McInnis G.

"The Struggle of Postmodernism and Postcolonialism]" . Canada: Laval University.

^ Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Prosperity . Washington, DC: World Bank. 2013.

doi : 10.1596/978-1-4648-0010-8 .

hdl : 10986/16195 .

ISBN 978-1-4648-0010-8 .

^ "World Bank World Development Report 2019: The Changing Nature of Work" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-10-07.

^ Coombs T, Nicholas A, Pirkis J (2013).

"A review of social inclusion measures" .

Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry .

47 (10): 906– 919.

doi : 10.1177/0004867413491161 .

hdl : 11343/58506 .

ISSN 0004-8674 .

PMID 23737598 .

^ "Cappo appointed Social Inclusion Commissioner" .

ABC News . 28 April 2006.

^ Street to Home, sacommunity.org ^ "Home" .

^ ABC News 20 Oct 2012 ^ "Julia Gillard: before office | naa.gov.au" .

www.naa.gov.au . Retrieved 2020-09-23 .

^ Dahl N (March 2018). "Social inclusion of senior citizens in Japan: an investigation into the 'Community-based Integrated Care System' ".

Contemporary Japan .

30 (1): 43– 59.

doi : 10.1080/18692729.2018.1424069 .

S2CID 158466875 .

^ a b c Mullaly B (2007).

The New Structural Social Work . Oxford University Press. pp.

252– 286.

ISBN 978-0195419061 .

^ Sakamoto I, Pitner RO (June 2005).

"Use of Critical Consciousness in Anti-Oppressive Social Work Practice: Disentangling Power Dynamics at Personal and Structural Levels" .

The British Journal of Social Work .

35 (4): 435– 452.

doi : 10.1093/bjsw/bch190 .

^ " Commissione di Indagine sull'Esclusione Sociale , accessed February 07, 2013" .

lavoro.gov.it . Archived from the original on 17 January 2013 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ "unhchr.ch" .

www.unhchr.ch . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Giddens A, Applebaum RP, Carr D, Duneier M, Mitchell GA (2011).

Introduction to Sociology (Seventh ed.).

Deleuze G (1980).

A Thousand Plateaus .

Giddens A (2009).

Introduction to Sociology . New York: W.W. Norton.

Karl Marx , Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 The globalized city: economic restructuring and social polarization in European cities (Reprinted ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2005.

ISBN 978-0-19-926040-9 .

Mullaly B (2007). "Oppression: The focus of structural social work.". In Mullaly B (ed.).

The new structural social work . Don Mills: Oxford University Press. pp.

252– 286.

Power A, Wilson WJ (2000).

Social Exclusion and the Future of Cities . London: Centre for Analysis of Social Exclusion, London School of Economics.

Rawls J (2005).

A theory of justice (Orig., reprint ed.). Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-01772-6 .

Sakamoto I, Pitner RO (2005). "Use of critical consciousness in anti-oppressive social work practice: disentangling power dynamics at personal and structural levels".

British Journal of Social Work .

35 (4): 435– 452.

doi : 10.1093/bjsw/bch190 .

Sewpaul V (April 2006). "The global–local dialectic: Challenges for African scholarship and social work in a post-colonial world".

British Journal of Social Work .

36 (3): 419– 434.

doi : 10.1093/bjsw/bcl003 .

Silver H (1994). "Social Exclusion and Social Solidarity: Three Paradigms".

International Labour Review .

133 ( 5– 6): 531– 578.

University of Georgia (2006, November 9). Social Exclusion Changes Brain Function And Can Lead To Poor Decision-making. ScienceDaily. Retrieved February 29, 2008, from http://www.sciencedaily.com /releases/2006/11/061108154256.htm URSPIC: An EU Research Project to measure impacts of urban development projects on social exclusion van Parijs P (2003).

Real freedom for all: what (if anything) can justify capitalism?

(Repr ed.). Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-829357-6 .

Yee JY, Dumbrill GC (2003). "Whiteout: Looking for Race in Canadian Social Work Practice". In Al-Krenawi A, Graham JR (eds.).

Multicultural Social Work in Canada: Working with Diverse Ethno-Racial Communities . Toronto: Oxford Press. pp.

98– 121.

Li Y (2005).

The structure and evolution of Chinese social stratification . Lanham, Md.: University Press of America.

ISBN 978-0-7618-3331-4 .

External links [ edit ] Is the U.S. a Good Model for Reducing Social Exclusion in Europe?

Center for Economic and Policy Research, August 2006 "Inclutivities" - A Collection of Games, Exercises and Activities for Use in Art Therapy and Training Programmes for Groups of Marginalised and Excluded Persons EU Project "Against Exclusion", 2014 v t e Segregation in countries by type (in some countries, categories overlap) Religious Partition of India Northern Ireland Israel Serbia Greece and Turkey Partition of Bengal Portugal Saudi Arabia Spain Bahrain Myanmar Ethnic and racial Canada Bahrain Brazil Bulgaria and Romania Bulgaria Czechoslovakia and Hungary Dominican Republic Fiji France Germany Israel Malaysia Portugal Rhodesia Apartheid in South Africa Spain United Kingdom United States Civil War Separate but equal School segregation Brown v. Board of Education Massive resistance Anti-miscegenation laws Gender Islam Afghanistan Iran Saudi Arabia Judaism Sex segregation in public restrooms Separatist feminism Dynamics Auto-segregation Balkanization Ethnic cleansing Ethnic federalism Bantustan Ethnopluralism Ethnocracy Exclusionary zoning Forced migration Internment labor camps Residential segregation in the United States Segregation academy (United States) Social exclusion Related topics Apartheid laws Anti-miscegenation laws Black Codes Corporative federalism Discrimination Ghetto benches Hafrada Jim Crow laws Majority minority Nativism Nuremberg Laws Racism Rankism Religious intolerance Reservation in India Second-class citizen Separate school (Canada) Shunning Social apartheid White Australia policy Xenophobia See also: Pillarisation Category caste gender racial Commons v t e Deprivation and poverty indicators Social Topics: Acting out Child abuse Disadvantaged Diseases of poverty Environmental degradation Environmental racism Fushūgaku Governance failure Hikikomori Mental illness Relative deprivation Self-image Social deprivation Social exclusion Social stigma Social vulnerability Social determinants of health in poverty Violence against women Vulnerability Measures: Social Progress Index Psychological Topics: Cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment Learned helplessness Psychological abuse psychological poverty Poverty and mental health Social determinants of mental health Economic Topics: Asset poverty Culture of poverty Debt bondage Energy poverty Extreme poverty Housing stress Human trafficking Income deficit Poverty threshold Precariat Precarious work Secondary poverty Social determinants of health in poverty Survival sex Water scarcity Measures: Below Poverty Line (India) Homeless Vulnerability Index Misery index (economics) Gini coefficient Genuine progress indicator (GPI) Legatum Prosperity Index Poverty gap index Physical Topics: Disability and poverty Food insecurity Physical abuse Sex trafficking Social determinants of health Poverty and violence Measures: India State Hunger Index Global Hunger Index Disability-adjusted life year (DALYs) Global Peace Index (GPI) Complex measures Human Poverty Index (HPI) Human Development Index (HDI) Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) Physical Quality of Life Index (PQLI) Living Planet Index (LPI) Progress out of Poverty Index Deprivation index Gender Topics: Feminization of poverty Measures: Gender-related Development Index (GDI) Gender Parity Index Other Categories: Income inequality metrics · Measurements and definitions of poverty · Social responsibility organizations Commons categories: Information graphics about poverty · Poverty-related maps v t e Social class Status Stratum Economic classes Theories Elite theory Gilbert model Marxian Mudsill theory New class Spoon class theory Weberian (three-component) Related topics Caste Chattering classes Class conflict Class discrimination Class society Class traitor Classicide Classless society Euthenics High society Nouveau riche / Parvenu Poverty Ranked society Snobbery Social cleansing Social exclusion Social mobility Social orphan Social position Social stigma Subaltern Status Anxiety By demographic By status Administrative detainee Alien illegal immigrant refugee Citizen dual or multiple native-born naturalized second-class Clique adolescent Convicted Migrant worker Political prisoner Socioeconomic Stateless By " collar " Blue Green Grey New Pink White By type Ruling Aristocracy Aristoi Hanseaten Magnate Oligarchy Russian Patrician Ancient Rome Post-Roman Political Family List Hereditary Royal family Intellectual Clergy Priest Knowledge worker Professor Scholar Warrior Chhetri Cossacks Cuāuh Harii Hashashin Knight Kshatriya Nair Ocēlōtl Pendekar Samurai Spartiate Vanniyar / Vanniar (Chieftain) Upper Business magnate Elite Gabellotto Gentry Lord Nobility Landed Petty Old money Overclass Robber baron Seigneur Superclass Creative Bohemians Middle Bourgeoisie Petite Burgher Lower middle class Upper middle class Working Commoner Lazzaroni Lumpenproletariat Pea-pickers Peasant Precariat Proletariat Working poor Under Ant tribe Outcast Outlaw / Prisoner Serf Plebeian Rat tribe Slave / Freedman Untouchable By country or region United States Affluence American Dream History Mobility Classes Upper Black Donor Gentry Middle Black Mexican-American Upper Middle Underprivileged Lower Under Income Household Inequality Personal Poverty Standard of living Education Homelessness Home-ownership Other regions or countries Africa Belize Cambodia China Colombia France Haiti India Iran Italy Luxembourg Nepal New Zealand Nigeria Romania Sri Lanka Tibet United Kingdom United States Historic 18th-century Spain Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Aztec Ottoman Empire Pre-industrial East Asia Pre-industrial Europe Soviet Union Category v t e Bullying Types Abusive supervision Cyberbullying Disability bullying Displaced aggression Doxing LGBTQ bullying Hazing Military bullying Mobbing Parental bullying of children Peer victimization Prison bullying Rank Relational aggression School bullying Higher education Sexual bullying Workplace harassment Workplace bullying Academia Information technology Legal aspects Legal profession Medicine Nursing Teaching Toxic leader Toxic workplace Elements Betrayal Blacklisting Bullying and emotional intelligence Cancel culture Character assassination Coercion Culture of fear Defamation Destabilisation Discrediting Embarrassment False accusation Gaslighting Gossip Harassment Humiliation Incivility Intimidation Kiss up kick down Mind games Moving the goalposts Nagging Name calling Personal attacks Physical abuse Psychological abuse Rudeness Sarcasm Screaming Shame Smear campaign Social exclusion Social undermining Swatting Taunting Workplace incivility Verbal abuse Organizations Act Against Bullying Ban Bossy Bullying UK Bystander Revolution Canadian Centre for Gender and Sexual Diversity Ditch the Label GRIN Campaign It Gets Better Project Kidscape Society Against Violence in Education Experts Academics Anna Costanza Baldry Wendy Craig Dorothy Espelage David P. Farrington Shelley Hymel Heinz Leymann Gary Namie James O'Higgins Norman Dan Olweus Debra Pepler Christina Salmivalli Kenneth Westhues Activists Andrea Adams Louise Burfitt-Dons Tim Field SuEllen Fried Liam Hackett Lizzie Velásquez Actions Anti-Bullying Day Anti-Bullying Week Anti-bullying legislation International Day of Pink International Stand Up to Bullying Day Think Before You Speak Notable suicides ( List ) William Arthur Gibbs (1877) Kelly Yeomans (1997) Hamed Nastoh (2000) Dawn-Marie Wesley (2000) Nicola Ann Raphael (2001) Ryan Halligan (2003) Megan Meier (2006) Sladjana Vidovic (2008) Phoebe Prince (2010) Tyler Clementi (2010) Jamey Rodemeyer (2011) Jamie Hubley (2011) Kenneth Weishuhn (2012) Audrie Pott (2012) Amanda Todd (2012) Jadin Bell (2013) Rehtaeh Parsons (2013) Rebecca Sedwick (2013) Leelah Alcorn (2014) Conrad Roy (2014) Tyrone Unsworth (2016) Murder–suicides (incidents) Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold Columbine , 1999 Jeff Weise Red Lake , 2005 Seung-Hui Cho Virginia Tech , 2007 Pekka-Eric Auvinen Jokela High School , 2007 Matti Juhani Saari Kauhajoki School of Hospitality , 2008 Jose Horacio Reyes Sparks Middle School , 2013 Elliot Rodger Isla Vista , 2014 Related topics Emotional blackmail Just-world fallacy List of LGBT-related suicides Machiavellianism in the workplace Narcissism in the workplace Personal boundaries Personality disorders Playing the victim Psychopathy in the workplace Scapegoating Self-esteem Social dominance orientation Suicide among LGBTQ people Victim blaming Victimisation Victimology v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases National Germany France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Social_exclusion&oldid=1305968773 " Categories : Social philosophy Political philosophy Urban decay Harassment and bullying Sociological terminology Shunning Social inequality Social rejection Segregation Discrimination Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from July 2016 All articles with style issues Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 04:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Social exclusion 43 languages Add topic

