Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Contemporary Paris 3 Notable buildings 4 Métro station 5 References 6 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré 21 languages Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 48°52′23″N 2°18′37″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.87296°N 2.31039°E ﻿ / 48.87296; 2.31039 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Street in Paris, France This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré View of the street in 2005 Shown within Paris Length 2,070 m (6,790 ft) Width 14.50 m (47.6 ft) between Rue Royale and Rue La Boétie ; 13.80 m between Rue La Boétie and Avenue de Wagram Arrondissement 8th Quarter Faubourg du Roule, Madeleine Coordinates 48°52′23″N 2°18′37″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.87296°N 2.31039°E ﻿ / 48.87296; 2.31039 From 15–19 Rue Royale To 46 Avenue de Wagram and 2 Place des Ternes Construction Denomination 10 December 1847 The Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré ( pronounced [ʁy dy fobuʁ sɛ̃t‿ɔnɔʁe] ) is a street located in the 8th arrondissement of Paris , France. Relatively narrow and nondescript, especially in comparison to the nearby Avenue des Champs-Élysées , it is cited as being one of the most luxurious and fashionable streets in the world thanks to the presence of major global fashion houses, the Élysée Palace (official residence of the President of France ), the Hôtel de Pontalba (residence of the United States Ambassador to France ), the Embassy of Canada , the Embassy of the United Kingdom , as well as numerous art galleries.

The Rue Saint-Honoré , of which the Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré is now an extension, began as a road extending west from the northern edge of the Louvre Palace .

Saint Honoré , Honorius of Amiens , is the French patron saint of bakers.

History [ edit ] Until the 18th century, a few villages were dispersed in a rural area that extended west of the Louvre . The main street (a dirt road) of Roule, one of the villages, became the Rue Neuve-Saint-Honoré ; it was lined and surrounded by a few mansions. The passage was upgraded in the 12th century to accommodate the increasing traffic from Paris's central market, Les Halles , to the outer villages. (The market was moved in 1971 from the center of Paris to the suburb of Rungis .) The road extended to the edge or gate of Paris. The passage was renamed Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré when the village became an official suburb of Paris; ( foris burgem in Latin means "outside the city"). Originally, the passage extended to the Forêt de Rouvray ("oak forest"), which covered a vast area west of Paris. Remnants of it are the Bois de Boulogne , as well as the 5,100 ha Forêt Domaniale de la Londe-Rouvray in Normandy .

The Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré was incorporated into Paris's city limits in 1860.

Contemporary Paris [ edit ] Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré Depending on tradition, the reliable gauge of style in Paris and high style can be found along ten blocks of the Rue Saint-Honoré, from the Rue Cambon to the Rue des Pyramides.

[ 1 ] Notable buildings [ edit ] The entrance gate of the Élysée Palace , the official residence of the President of the French Republic No. 13: Fabergé & Cie (1924–2001).

No. 14: The atelier and boutique of couturier Dominique Sirop , who established his enterprise in 1996 and at this location from 2000.

No. 19: Perfumer Jean-François Houbigant established his shop, À la Corbeille de Fleurs ("at the sign of the flower basket"), in 1775.

No. 21: Chanel boutique.

No. 22: The flagship store of Lanvin , initially established by Jeanne Lanvin in 1889, and located here as a couture establishment after several prior locations.

No. 24: The flagship store of Hermès , established in 1837 and located at the present address since 1880. No. 24 is also the headquarters of the Hermès Group [ 2 ] No. 25: Residence of composer Igor Stravinsky , 1934–1939.

[ 3 ] No. 29: The institute and headquarters of Lancôme , the cosmetics brand, established in 1935.

No. 31: The Hôtel Pillet-Will, the residence of the Japanese Ambassador to France .

No. 33: The Hôtel Perrinet de Jars , clubhouse of the Cercle de l'Union interalliée , the building as a pair with no. 35, built in 1713.

No. 35: The Embassy of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland , purchased by the British government in 1947 and altered.

No. 39: The Hôtel de Charost , the official residence of the British Ambassador to France .

No. 41: The Hôtel de Pontalba , designed by Louis Visconti , now the residence of the United States Ambassador to France , having been purchased by the American government in 1948.

No. 55: The Élysée Palace , originally the Hôtel d'Évreux, completed and decorated by 1722; where Napoleon signed his abdication in favor of his son on June 22, 1815; it is now the official residence of the President of the French Republic .

No. 56: The offices of the French edition of Vogue magazine in the Publications Condé Nast Building.

No. 58: Léo Marciano Paris .

No. 59: Boutique Pierre Cardin .

No. 69: Galerie d'Art Saint-Honoré .

No. 71: The former address of Galerie J. Le Chapelin in the 1950s (now closed).

No. 76: Galerie Charpentier , which now houses Sotheby's France.

No. 83: Cifonelli bespoke tailoring shop.

No. 96: Ministry of the Interior (on the Place Beauvau ).

No. 101: The flagship shop and tea room of Dalloyau , a luxury gastronomic brand name.

No. 112: The Hôtel Le Bristol , a luxury hotel.

No. 130: The Embassy of Canada and the Canadian Cultural Centre.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] No. 135: The residence of the Canadian Ambassador to France , formerly known as the Hôtel de Rigny or the Hôtel de Fels.

[ 6 ] No. 154: Église Saint-Philippe-du-Roule No. 222 : Convent of the Dominicans ; organist Adrien Rougier played in the church of the convent.

No. 235: Artists' studios building by Gustave Eiffel , 1850s.

No. 252: Salle Pleyel , a concert hall named after Ignace Pleyel , an Austrian-born French composer and piano manufacturer.

No. 260: Mariage Frères , a luxury tea company founded in 1854.

Métro station [ edit ] The Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré is: ___ Located near the Métro stations : Saint-Philippe du Roule and Madeleine .

It is served by the 2 , 8 , 9 , 12 , and 14 lines.

References [ edit ] ^ Horyn, Cathy (May 12, 2002).

"ONE STREET AT A TIME; Rue St.-Honoré" – via The New York Times.

^ "Faubourg Saint-Honoré fashion stores" . Paris Digest. 2018 . Retrieved October 17, 2018 .

^ Strawinsky, Théodore ; Strawinsky, Denise (2004).

Stravinsky: A Family Chronicle . Translated by Walsh, Stephen . Schirmer Trade Books. pp. 117, 147.

ISBN 0-8256-7290-2 .

^ "L'ambassade du Canada quitte l'avenue Montaigne à Paris" .

Le Figaro . March 4, 2015.

^ "Paris Chancery Relocation Project (PDF file)" (PDF) .

^ The Official Residence – Embassy of Canada in France Bibliography [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré .

Galey, Bernard-Claude, Origines surprenantes des noms de villages, des noms des rues de Paris et de villes de province , Le Cherche Midi, Paris, 2004.

ISBN 978-2-7491-0192-7 .

Stéphane, Bernard (author) & Giesbert, Franz-Olivier (Preface), Petite et Grande Histoire des rues de Paris , Albin Michel, Paris, 2000.

ISBN 978-2-226-10879-1 .

Thorval, Anne, Promenades sur les lieux de l'histoire: D'Henri IV à Mai 68, les rues de Paris racontent l'histoire de France , Paragamme, Paris, 2004.

ISBN 978-2-84096-323-3 .

v t e Tourism in Paris Landmarks Arc de Triomphe Arc de Triomphe du Carrousel Arènes de Lutèce Bourse Catacombs Conciergerie Eiffel Tower Gare d'Austerlitz Gare de l'Est Gare de Lyon Gare du Nord Gare Montparnasse Gare Saint-Lazare Grand Palais and Petit Palais Institut de France Jeanne d'Arc Les Invalides Napoleon's tomb Louvre Pyramid Luxor Obelisk Odéon Opéra Bastille Opéra Garnier Panthéon Philharmonie de Paris Place Diana Flame of Liberty Porte Saint-Denis Porte Saint-Martin Sorbonne Tour Montparnasse Museums ( list ) Army Museum Bibliothèque nationale Carnavalet Centre Pompidou Cité des Sciences et de l'Industrie Galerie nationale du Jeu de Paume Louis Vuitton Foundation Musée des Arts décoratifs Musée des Arts et Métiers Musée d'Art et d'Histoire du Judaïsme Musée d'Art Moderne de Paris Maison de Balzac Musée Bourdelle Musée de la Cinémathèque Musée Cognacq-Jay Musée Grévin Musée Guimet Maison de Victor Hugo Musée Jacquemart-André Musée du Louvre Musée Marmottan Monet Musée de la Vie romantique Musée de Montmartre Musée National d'Art Moderne Musée national Eugène Delacroix Musée national Gustave Moreau Musée national des Monuments Français Muséum national d'histoire naturelle Musée de Cluny – Musée national du Moyen Âge Musée de l'Orangerie Musée d'Orsay Musée Pasteur Musée Picasso Musée du Quai Branly Musée Rodin Palais de la Légion d'Honneur Musée de la Légion d'honneur Palais de Tokyo Religious buildings Alexander Nevsky Cathedral American Cathedral American Church Armenian Cathedral of St. John the Baptist Chapelle expiatoire Grand Mosque Grand Synagogue Synagogue de Nazareth La Madeleine Notre-Dame de Paris Notre-Dame-de-Bonne-Nouvelle Notre-Dame-de-Lorette Notre-Dame-des-Victoires Sacré-Cœur Saint Ambroise Saint-Augustin Saint-Étienne-du-Mont Saint-Eustache Saint-François-Xavier Saint-Germain-des-Prés Saint-Germain l'Auxerrois Saint-Gervais-Saint-Protais Tour Saint-Jacques Saint-Jean de Montmartre Saint-Paul-Saint-Louis Saint-Pierre de Montmartre Saint-Roch Saint-Sulpice Saint-Vincent-de-Paul Sainte-Chapelle Sainte-Clotilde Sainte-Trinité Temple du Marais Val-de-Grâce Hôtels particuliers and palaces Élysée Palace Hôtel de Beauvais Hôtel de Charost Hôtel de Crillon Hôtel d'Estrées Hôtel de la Païva Hôtel de Pontalba Hôtel de Sens Hôtel de Soubise Hôtel de Sully Hôtel de Ville Hôtel Lambert Hôtel Matignon Luxembourg Palace Petit Luxembourg Palais Bourbon Palais de Justice Palais de la Cité Palais-Royal Bridges, streets, areas, squares and waterways Avenue de l'Opéra Avenue Foch Avenue George V Boulevard de la Madeleine Boulevard de Sébastopol Canal de l'Ourcq Canal Saint-Martin Champ de Mars Champs-Élysées Covered passages Galerie Véro-Dodat Choiseul Panoramas Galerie Vivienne Havre Jouffroy Brady Latin Quarter Le Marais Montmartre Montparnasse Place Diana Place Dauphine Place de la Bastille Place de la Concorde Place de la Nation Place de la République Place des Émeutes-de-Stonewall Place des États-Unis Place des Pyramides Place des Victoires Place des Vosges Place du Carrousel Place du Châtelet Place du Tertre Place Saint-Michel Place Vendôme Pont Alexandre III Pont d'Iéna Pont de Bir-Hakeim Pont des Arts Pont Neuf Port du Louvre Rive Gauche Rue Basse Rue Bonaparte Rue Charlemagne Rue d'Argenteuil Rue de la Ferronnerie Rue de la Paix Rue de la Sourdière Rue de Montmorency Rue de Richelieu Rue de Rivoli Rue de Vaugirard Rue des Francs-Bourgeois Rue des Lombards Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré Rue Elzévir Rue Foyatier Rue Molière Rue Montorgueil Rue Radziwill Rue Rambuteau Rue Mondétour Rue Pastourelle Rue des Rosiers Rue Saint-Honoré Rue Saint-Denis Rue Sainte-Anne Saint-Germain-des-Prés Trocadéro Viaduc d'Austerlitz Parks and gardens ( list ) Bois de Boulogne Jardin d'Acclimatation Bois de Vincennes Parc floral Jardin du Luxembourg Parc André-Citroën Parc Clichy-Batignolles Parc de Belleville Parc de Bercy Parc de la Butte-du-Chapeau-Rouge Parc des Buttes Chaumont Parc Georges-Brassens Parc Monceau Parc Montsouris Tuileries Garden Coulée verte René-Dumont Sport venues Accor Arena Auteuil Hippodrome Halle Georges Carpentier Longchamp Hippodrome Parc des Princes Piscine Molitor Porte de La Chapelle Arena Stade Jean Bouin Stade Pershing Stade Pierre de Coubertin Stade Roland Garros Stade Sébastien Charléty Vélodrome de Vincennes Vincennes Hippodrome Cemeteries Montmartre Cemetery Montparnasse Cemetery Passy Cemetery Père Lachaise Cemetery Oscar Wilde's tomb Picpus Cemetery Région parisienne Basilica of Saint-Denis Château d'Écouen Château de Chantilly Château de Fontainebleau Château de Malmaison Château de Rambouillet Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye Château de Sceaux Château and Gardens of Versailles ( Grand Trianon and Petit Trianon , including the Fresh pavilion ) Château de Vincennes La Défense Grande Arche Paris La Défense Arena Disneyland Paris Disneyland Park Walt Disney Studios Park Exploradôme Fort Mont-Valérien Mémorial de la France combattante Suresnes American Cemetery and Memorial France Miniature Musée de l'air et de l'espace Musée Fragonard d'Alfort Parc Astérix Parc de Saint-Cloud Provins La Roche-Guyon Sèvres – Cité de la céramique Stade de France Vaux-le-Vicomte Culture and events Bastille Day military parade Dîner en Blanc Fête de la Musique Nuit Blanche Paris Air Show Paris Fashion Week Paris-Plages Republican Guard Solidays Other Axe historique Bateau-Lavoir Bateaux Mouches Café des 2 Moulins Café Procope Folies Bergère Fountains in Paris La Ruche Les Deux Magots Maxim's Moulin de la Galette Moulin Rouge Paris Métro entrances Montmartre Funicular Paris Musées Paris syndrome Paris Zoological Park Pyramide inversée World Heritage Centre Related List of tourist attractions in Paris Art in Paris Paris syndrome Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rue_du_Faubourg_Saint-Honoré&oldid=1283943725 " Categories : Streets in the 8th arrondissement of Paris Shopping districts and streets in France Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2021 Articles needing additional references from January 2016 All articles needing additional references Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using infobox street with Paris-specific parameters Pages with French IPA Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 April 2025, at 16:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré 21 languages Add topic

