Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Erroneous description in term of hadronic pancakes or gluonic wall 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Color-glass condensate 4 languages العربية Deutsch Français Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hypothetical phase of matter Color-glass condensate ( CGC ) is a type of matter theorized to exist in atomic nuclei when they collide at near the speed of light . During such collision, one is sensitive to the gluons that have very small momenta, or more precisely a very small x B j {\displaystyle x_{Bj}} Bjorken scaling variable. 
The small momenta gluons dominate the description of the collision because their density is very large. This is because a high-momentum gluon is likely to split into smaller momentum gluons. 
When the gluon density becomes large enough, gluon-gluon recombination puts a limit on how large the gluon density can be.  When gluon recombination balances gluon splitting, the density of gluons saturates, producing new and universal properties of hadronic matter. This state of saturated gluon matter is called the color-glass condensate .

[ 1 ] "Color" in the name "color-glass condensate" refers to a type of charge that quarks and gluons carry as a result of the strong nuclear force . The word " glass " is borrowed from the term for silica and other materials that are disordered and act like solids on short time scales but liquids on long time scales. In the CGC phase , the gluons themselves are disordered and do not change their positions rapidly. "Condensate" means that the gluons have a very high density.

The color-glass condensate describes an intrinsic property of matter that can only be observed under high-energy conditions such as those at RHIC , the Large Hadron Collider [ 2 ] as well as the future Electron Ion Collider .

[ 3 ] The color-glass condensate is important because it is proposed as a universal form of matter that describes the properties of all high-energy, strongly interacting particles. It has simple properties that follow from first principles in the theory of strong interactions, quantum chromodynamics . It has the potential to explain many unsolved problems such as how particles are produced in high-energy collisions, and the distribution of matter itself inside of these particles.

Researchers at CERN believe they have created color-glass condensates during collisions of protons with lead ions .  In these sorts of collisions, the standard outcome is that new particles are created and fly off in different directions. However, the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) team at the LHC found that in a sample of 2 million lead-proton collisions, some pairs of particles flew away from each other with their respective directions correlated.

[ 2 ] This correlation of directions is the anomaly that might be caused by the existence of a color-glass condensate while the particles are colliding.

Erroneous description in term of hadronic pancakes or gluonic wall [ edit ] The high density of gluon seen during the collision is often explained by contraction of the nucleus. Accordingly, this one would appear compressed along its direction of motion and as a result, the gluons inside the nucleus would appear to a stationary observer as a "gluonic wall" traveling near the speed of light . At very high energies, the density of the gluons in this wall would then increase greatly. However, this description is incorrect for two reasons: [ 4 ] Such description depends on the frame and therefore violates Lorentz invariance : a fundamental description of the structure of an object cannot depend on a choice of frame. A classical analogy would be if one would provide a fundamental description using fictitious forces such as the Coriolis force .

contraction is not observable in collision experiments due to the Penrose–Terrell effect .

A correct description of the collision can be given using light-front wave functions , [ 5 ] [ 6 ] which are frame-independent .

See also [ edit ] Glasma References [ edit ] ^ Gelis, Francois; Iancu, Edmond; Jalilian-Marian, Jamal; Venugopalan, Raju (2010). "The Color Glass Condensate".

Annual Review of Nuclear and Particle Science .

60 : 463– 489.

arXiv : 1002.0333 .

Bibcode : 2010ARNPS..60..463G .

doi : 10.1146/annurev.nucl.010909.083629 .

S2CID 118675789 .

^ a b CMS-collaboration siehe Compact Muon Solenoid (2013). "Observation of long-range near-side angular correlations in proton-lead collisions at the LHC".

Physics Letters B .

718 (3): 795– 814.

arXiv : 1210.5482 .

Bibcode : 2013PhLB..718..795C .

doi : 10.1016/j.physletb.2012.11.025 .

^ A. Accardi et al., “Electron Ion Collider: The Next QCD Frontier – Understanding the glue that binds us all,” 2012.

^ [S. J. Brodsky (2015) “Novel Perspectives from Light-Front QCD, Super-Conformal Algebra, and Light-Front Holography”] Bled Workshops Phys. 16 (2015) 2, 35–46 [arXiv:1512.05100] ^ P. A. M. Dirac, (1949) “Forms of Relativistic Dynamics” Rev. Mod. Phys. 21, 392–399 ^ [S. J. Brodsky, H. C. Pauli and S. S. Pinsky, (1998) "Quantum chromodynamics and other field theories on the light cone" Phys. Rep. 301 299–486 [arXiv:hep-ph/9705477] "Background on color glass condensate" .

Brookhaven National Laboratory .

McLerran, Larry (April 26, 2001).

"The Color Glass Condensate and Small x Physics: 4 Lectures" .

Iancu, Edmond; Venugopalan, Raju (March 24, 2003).

"The Color Glass Condensate and High Energy Scattering in QCD" .

Weigert, Heribert (January 11, 2005).

"Evolution at small x_bj: The Color Glass Condensate" .

Riordon, James; Schewe, Phil; Stein, Ben (January 14, 2004).

"Color Glass Condensate" . aip.org.

Moskowitz, Clara (November 27, 2012).

"Color-Glass Condensate: New State Of Matter May Have Been Created By Large Hadron Collider" . HuffingtonPost.com Trafton, Anne (November 27, 2012).

"Lead-proton collisions yield surprising results" . MITnews.

External links [ edit ] Childers, Tim (2019-09-24).

"Einstein's Theory Predicts a Weird State of Matter. Could It Be Lurking in the World's Largest Atom Smasher?" .

livescience.com . Retrieved 2019-09-24 .

v t e States of matter ( list , timeline ) State Solid Liquid Gas / Vapor Supercritical fluid Plasma Low energy Bose–Einstein condensate Fermionic condensate Degenerate matter Quantum Hall Rydberg matter Strange matter Superfluid Supersolid Photonic molecule High energy QCD matter Quark–gluon plasma Color-glass condensate Other states Colloid Crystal Liquid crystal Time crystal Quantum spin liquid Exotic matter Programmable matter Dark matter Antimatter Magnetically ordered Antiferromagnet Ferrimagnet Ferromagnet String-net liquid Superglass Phase transitions Boiling Boiling point Condensation Critical line Critical point Crystallization Deposition Evaporation Flash evaporation Freezing Chemical ionization Ionization Lambda point Melting Melting point Recombination Regelation Saturated fluid Sublimation Supercooling Triple point Vaporization Vitrification Quantities Enthalpy of fusion Enthalpy of sublimation Enthalpy of vaporization Latent heat Latent internal energy Trouton's rule Volatility Concepts Baryonic matter Binodal Compressed fluid Cooling curve Equation of state Leidenfrost effect Macroscopic quantum phenomena Mpemba effect Order and disorder (physics) Spinodal Superconductivity Superheated vapor Superheating Thermo-dielectric effect Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Color-glass_condensate&oldid=1298584936 " Categories : Quantum chromodynamics Nuclear physics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 July 2025, at 11:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Color-glass condensate 4 languages Add topic

