Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 1.1 Extent 2 Name 3 Fisheries 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Arafura Sea 89 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Кырык мары Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 9°00′S 133°0′E ﻿ / ﻿ 9.000°S 133.000°E ﻿ / -9.000; 133.000 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Marginal sea between Australia and Indonesian New Guinea Arafura Sea Laut Arafura ( Indonesian ) Location Arafura Sea Map Location Oceania Coordinates 9°00′S 133°0′E ﻿ / ﻿ 9.000°S 133.000°E ﻿ / -9.000; 133.000 Type Sea Basin countries Australia , Indonesia , and Papua New Guinea Max. length 1,290 km (800 mi) Max. width 560 km (350 mi) Surface area 650,000 km 2 (250,000 sq mi) Islands Aru Islands , Croker Island , Goulburn Islands , Howard Island , Tanimbar Islands References [ 1 ] The Arafura Sea , also known as the Arafuru Sea , lies west of the Pacific Ocean , overlying the continental shelf between Australia and Western New Guinea (also called Papua), which is the Indonesian part of the Island of New Guinea .

Geography [ edit ] The Arafura Sea is bordered by the Gulf of Carpentaria and the continent of Australia to the south, the Timor Sea to the west, the Banda and Seram seas to the northwest, and the Torres Strait to the east. (Just across the strait, farther to the east, lies the Coral Sea ). The Arafura Sea is 1,290 kilometres (800 mi) long and 560 kilometres (350 mi) wide. The depth of the sea is 50–80 m (160–260 ft) in most places, with the depth increasing to the west.

The sea lies over the Arafura Shelf, which is a section of the Sahul Shelf . When sea levels were low during the last glacial maximum , the Arafura Shelf, the Gulf of Carpentaria and the Torres Strait formed a large, flat, land bridge that connected Australia and New Guinea and eased the migration of humans from Asia into Australia. The combined landmass formed the continent of Sahul .

Extent [ edit ] The International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) categorises the Arafura Sea as one of the bodies of water of the East Indian Archipelago . The IHO defines its limits as follows: [ 2 ] On the North.

The Southeastern limit of the Ceram Sea [A line from Karoefa, New Guinea, to the Southeastern extreme of Adi Island , thence to Tg. Borang, the Northern point of Noehoe Tjoet [ Kai Besar ] ( 5°17′S 133°09′E ﻿ / ﻿ 5.283°S 133.150°E ﻿ / -5.283; 133.150 )] and the Eastern limit of the Banda Sea [From Tg Borang, the Northern point of Noehoe Tjoet, through this island to its Southern point, thence a line to the Northeast point of Fordata, through this island and across to the Northeast point of Larat, Tanimbar Islands ( 7°06′S 131°55′E ﻿ / ﻿ 7.100°S 131.917°E ﻿ / -7.100; 131.917 ), down the East coast of Jamdena [ Yamdena ] Island to its Southern point, thence through Anggarmasa to the North point of Selaroe and through this island to Tg Aro Oesoe its Southern point ( 8°21′S 130°45′E ﻿ / ﻿ 8.350°S 130.750°E ﻿ / -8.350; 130.750 )].

On the East.

The Southwest coast of New Guinea from Karoefa (133°27'E) to the entrance to the Bensbak River (141°01'E), and thence a line to the Northwest extreme of York Peninsula , Australia ( 11°05′S 142°03′E ﻿ / ﻿ 11.083°S 142.050°E ﻿ / -11.083; 142.050 ).

On the South.

By the North coast of Australia from the Northwest extreme of York Peninsula to Cape Don ( 11°19′S 131°46′E ﻿ / ﻿ 11.317°S 131.767°E ﻿ / -11.317; 131.767 ).

On the West.

A line from Cape Don to Tanjong Aro Oesoe, the Southern point of Selaroe ( Tanimbar Islands ).

Name [ edit ] European use of the name "Arafura Sea" dates back to at least 1663, when Joan Blaeu recorded in the text on his wall map of the East Indies ("Archipelagus Orientalis, sive Asiaticus") that the inland inhabitants of the Moluccas call themselves "Alfores".

[ 3 ] The name also appeared in George Windsor Earl 's 1837 Sailing Directions for the Arafura Sea , which he compiled from the narratives of Lieutenants Kolff and Modera of the Royal Netherlands Navy .

[ 4 ] Although it has been suggested that Arafura derives from the Portuguese word "Alfours", meaning "free men", it seems more likely that sea is named after the Harrafora, the indigenous name for "the people of mountains" in the Moluccas (part of Indonesia), which was the explanation recorded by Lieutenants Kolff and Modera in the 1830s.

[ 4 ] Thomas Forrest sailed through the Moluccas ( Maluku Islands ) in 1775, and documented that there were people who called themselves the "Harafora" living in the western end of New Guinea , in subordination to the "Papuas". He also reported their presence in Magindano ( Mindanao ).

[ 5 ] The geographer Conrad Malte-Brun repeated Forrest's reports of a race of "Haraforas" in 1804, [ 6 ] and added Borneo to the list of places this group inhabited.

[ 7 ] The ethnologist James C. Prichard described the Haraforas as head-hunters.

[ 8 ] John Coulter, in his account of a sojourn in the interior of south-west New Guinea in 1835, [ 9 ] referred to the tribespeople there as the "Horrafora", and had the impression that Papuans and Horraforans were two distinct groups in New Guinea.

AJ van der Aa's 1939 Toponymic Dictionary, recently rediscovered in the Dutch National Archives , has this explanation for the name of the sea: "The inhabitants of the Moluccas called themselves 'haraforas', which translates to 'anak-anak gunung', meaning 'children of the mountains'." Fisheries [ edit ] The Arafura Sea is a rich fishery resource, particularly for shrimp and demersal fish. Economically important species include Barramundi , grouper , Penaeid shrimp, and Nemipteridae fishes, among others.

At a time when many marine ecosystems and fish stocks around the world are diminished or collapsing, the Arafura Sea stands out as among the richest marine fisheries on Earth.

[ 10 ] However, the natural resources of the Arafura have been under increased  pressure from illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing activities.

The Arafura and Timor Seas Expert Forum (ATSEF) was established in 2002 to promote the economically and environmentally sustainable management of those seas.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Arafura Sea .

Australia portal Indonesia portal Alfur people Aru Islands Asmat people Makassan contact with Australia References [ edit ] ^ Arafura Sea: OS (Oceans) National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, Bethesda, MD, USA ^ "Limits of Oceans and Seas, 3rd edition" (PDF) . International Hydrographic Organization. 1953. pp.

27– 28. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 October 2011 . Retrieved 28 December 2020 .

^ Joan Blaeu Archipelagus Orientalis, sive Asiaticus  Apud Ioannem Blaeu Published: Amsterdam  Apud Joannem Blaeu, 1663 ^ a b Earl, George Windsor; Kolff, D. H.; Modera, Justin (1837).

"Sailing directions for the Arafura Sea" . Hydrographic Office, London.

^ Captain Thomas Forrest, A Voyage to New Guinea, and the Moluccas, from Balambangan: &c.

(Dublin, 1779).

^ Edme Mentelle & Malte Brun, Géographie mathématique, physique et politique de toutes les parties du monde, &c., vol. XII (Paris, Henry Tardieu & Laporte, 1804), pages 400, 597.

^ M. Malte-Brun, Universal Geography, or a Description of All the Parts of the World on a New Plan, &c., vol. III (Edinburgh, Adam Black, 1822).

^ James Clowes Prichard, Researches into the Physical History of Man (London, J. & A. Arch, 1813), page 307.

^ John Coulter, M.D., Adventures on the Western Coast of South America and the Interior of California: including a narrative of incidents at the Kingsmill Islands, New Ireland, New Britain, New Guinea, and other islands in the Pacific Ocean; &c.

, vol. II (London, Longmans, 1847), chapters 11—16.

^ Biophysical Profile of the Arafura and Timor Seas.

^ Arafura and Timor Seas Expert Forum (ATSEF) ^ "The Arafura and Timor Seas Ecosystem Action Program (ATSEA)" . Archived from the original on 2018-08-23 . Retrieved 2018-08-23 .

v t e List of Australian seas Ocean Indian Ocean Pacific Ocean Southern Ocean Sea Arafura Sea Coral Sea Tasman Sea Timor Sea Strait Backstairs Passage Bass Strait Clarence Strait Dundas Strait Endeavour Strait Investigator Strait Torres Strait Gulf Admiralty Gulf Beagle Gulf Cambridge Gulf Gulf of Carpentaria Great Australian Bight Exmouth Gulf Joseph Bonaparte Gulf Gulf St Vincent Spencer Gulf Van Diemen Gulf Australia portal Oceans portal v t e Indonesian seas East Indian Archipelago Ocean Indian Ocean Pacific Ocean Sea Andaman Sea Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Celebes Sea Flores Sea Halmahera Sea Java Sea Molucca Sea Natuna Sea Philippine Sea Savu Sea Seram Sea South China Sea Timor Sea Strait Alas Strait Alor Strait Badung Strait Bali Strait Bangka Strait Berhala Strait Dampier Strait Gaspar Strait Karimata Strait Laut Strait Lombok Strait Madura Strait Makassar Strait Malacca Strait Mentawai Strait Ombai Strait Pitt Strait Riau Strait Rupat Strait Sape Strait Selayar Strait Singapore Strait Sumba Strait Sunda Strait Wetar Strait Gulf Ambon Bay Balikpapan Bay Berau Gulf Bintuni Bay Boni Gulf Cenderawasih Bay Jakarta Bay Lampung Bay Palabuhanratu Bay Saleh Bay Semangka Bay Tolo Gulf Tomini Gulf Yos Sudarso Bay Indonesia portal Oceans portal v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arafura_Sea&oldid=1302471624 " Categories : Arafura Sea Bodies of water of Australia Coastline of the Northern Territory Seas of Indonesia Seas of Oceania Australia–Indonesia border Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Indonesian-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 16:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Arafura Sea 89 languages Add topic

