Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theory 2 Source 3 Other appearances 4 See also 5 Notes 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Newton's cannonball 11 languages العربية বাংলা Español Français Português Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska ไทย Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Thought experiment about gravity A cannon on top of a very high mountain shoots a cannonball horizontally.  If the speed is low, the cannonball quickly falls back to Earth (A, B). At intermediate speeds , it will revolve around Earth along an elliptical orbit (C, D). Beyond the escape velocity , it will leave the Earth without returning (E).

Newton's cannonball was a thought experiment Isaac Newton used to hypothesize that the force of gravity was universal, and it was the key force for planetary motion . It appeared in his posthumously published 1728 work De mundi systemate (also published in English as A Treatise of the System of the World ).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Theory [ edit ] In this experiment from his book (pp. 5–8), [ 2 ] Newton visualizes a stone being projected from the top of a high mountain, and "that there is no air about the earth, or at least that it is endowed with little or no power of resisting".

As a gravitational force acts on the projectile, it will follow a different path depending on its initial velocity.

If the speed is low, it will simply fall back on Earth.

If the speed is the orbital speed at that altitude, it will go on circling around the Earth along a fixed circular orbit "and return to the mountain from which it was projected".

If the speed is higher than the orbital velocity, but not high enough to leave Earth altogether (lower than the escape velocity ), it will continue revolving around Earth along an elliptical orbit.

If the speed is very high, it will leave Earth in a parabolic (at exactly escape velocity) or hyperbolic trajectory.

Source [ edit ] Newton's original plan for Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica was that it should consist of two books, the first analyzing basic laws of motion, and the second applying them to the Solar System.  In order to include more material on motion in resisting media, the first book was split into two; the succeeding (now third) book, originally written in a more popular style, was rewritten to be more mathematical.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] However, manuscripts of an earlier draft of this last book survived, and a version of it was published in 1728 as De mundi systemate ; an English translation was also published earlier in 1728 under the name A Treatise of the System of the World .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 4 ] The thought experiment occurs near the start of this work.

Other appearances [ edit ] A photograph of page 6 from Newton's De mundi systemate ( A Treatise of the System of the World ), as it appears on the Voyager Golden Record An image of the page from A Treatise of the System of the World showing Newton's diagram of this experiment was included on the Voyager Golden Record , [ 5 ] as image #111.

See also [ edit ] Physics portal Spaceflight portal Mass#Newton's cannonball Space gun Physics Notes [ edit ] ^ a b De mundi systemate , Isaac Newton, London: J. Tonson, J. Osborn, & T. Longman, 1728.

^ a b c A Treatise of the System of the World , Isaac Newton, London: printed for F. Fayram, 1728.

^ Newton’s Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica , George Smith, 2007, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 14 September 2021.

^ a b Newton, Isaac; Cohen, I. Bernard (1 January 2004).

A Treatise of the System of the World . Courier Corporation.

ISBN 978-0-486-43880-1 .

^ Sagan, Carl et al.

(1978) Murmurs of Earth: The Voyager Interstellar Record . New York: Random House.

ISBN 0-394-41047-5 (hardcover), ISBN 0-345-28396-1 (paperback) External links [ edit ] Newton Thought Experiment Simulator Bucknell.edu – Astronomy 101 Specials: Newton's Cannonball and the Speed of Orbiting Objects Drawing in the 1731 (2nd) edition of 'A Treatise of the System of the World' @ Google books Newton's Cannon animation v t e Sir Isaac Newton Publications Fluxions (1671) De Motu (1684) Principia (1687) Opticks (1704) Queries (1704) Arithmetica (1707) De Analysi (1711) Other writings Quaestiones (1661–1665) " standing on the shoulders of giants " (1675) Notes on the Jewish Temple (c. 1680) " General Scholium " (1713; " hypotheses non fingo " ) Ancient Kingdoms Amended (1728) Corruptions of Scripture (1754) Contributions Calculus fluxion Impact depth Inertia Newton disc Newton polygon Newton–Okounkov body Newton's reflector Newtonian telescope Newton scale Newton's metal Spectrum Structural coloration Newtonianism Bucket argument Newton's inequalities Newton's law of cooling Newton's law of universal gravitation post-Newtonian expansion parameterized gravitational constant Newton–Cartan theory Schrödinger–Newton equation Newton's laws of motion Kepler's laws Newtonian dynamics Newton's method in optimization Apollonius's problem truncated Newton method Gauss–Newton algorithm Newton's rings Newton's theorem about ovals Newton–Pepys problem Newtonian potential Newtonian fluid Classical mechanics Corpuscular theory of light Leibniz–Newton calculus controversy Newton's notation Rotating spheres Newton's cannonball Newton–Cotes formulas Newton's method generalized Gauss–Newton method Newton fractal Newton's identities Newton polynomial Newton's theorem of revolving orbits Newton–Euler equations Newton number kissing number problem Newton's quotient Parallelogram of force Newton–Puiseux theorem Absolute space and time Luminiferous aether Newtonian series table Personal life Woolsthorpe Manor (birthplace) Cranbury Park (home) Early life Later life Apple tree Religious views Occult studies Scientific Revolution Copernican Revolution Relations Catherine Barton (niece) John Conduitt (nephew-in-law) Isaac Barrow (professor) William Clarke (mentor) Benjamin Pulleyn (tutor) Roger Cotes (student) William Whiston (student) John Keill (disciple) William Stukeley (friend) William Jones (friend) Abraham de Moivre (friend) Depictions Newton by Blake (monotype) Newton by Paolozzi (sculpture) Isaac Newton Gargoyle Astronomers Monument Namesake Newton (unit) Newton's cradle Isaac Newton Institute Isaac Newton Medal Isaac Newton Telescope Isaac Newton Group of Telescopes XMM-Newton Sir Isaac Newton Sixth Form Statal Institute of Higher Education Isaac Newton Newton International Fellowship Categories Isaac Newton Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Newton%27s_cannonball&oldid=1280661929 " Categories : Isaac Newton Thought experiments in physics Space guns Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2022 This page was last edited on 15 March 2025, at 19:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Newton's cannonball 11 languages Add topic

