Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Curriculum role Toggle Curriculum role subsection 2.1 STEM education 3 Effects 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents School garden 7 languages Čeština Deutsch 한국어 Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article's lead section may need to be rewritten .

Please review the lead guide and help improve the lead of this article if you can.

( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "School garden" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2024 ) This article may require copy editing for grammar, style, cohesion, tone, or spelling .

You can assist by editing it .

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Sustainable Teaching Garden at Tarleton State University A school garden is an area designated for students to learn how to grow plants and produce at their schools. They are commonly established to improve students' health, social development, and academic achievement.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] History [ edit ] The value of school gardens in education has long been recognized in Europe . They were started as early as 1819 in Schleswig-Holstein . In 1869 they were prescribed by law in Austria and Sweden , in Belgium since 1873 and in France since 1880. In the early 20th century, there were 20,000 schools in Austria with gardens, 45,000 in France, 8,000 in Russia , and 2,500 in Sweden.

[ citation needed ] There used to be 5,000 school gardens in Sweden, but since the introduction of manual training the total has halved. School gardening was practically obligatory for the children of the common schools of Belgium, the Netherlands , British West Indies, and Ceylon. Many governments subsidized the school gardens, offered prizes, and made training in agriculture obligatory for normal school graduates.

Some universities in the United States, including Cornell , the University of Illinois , Ohio State University , and Louisiana State University , have taken up the subject of school agriculture, country life, and scientific farming in earnest. Pamphlets are published by experts in agriculture dealing with important phases of school agriculture and school gardens, in particular Jewell's Agricultural Education (Bulletin 368, U. S. Bureau of Education).

[ citation needed ] Curriculum role [ edit ] The school garden has an important relation to several curriculum areas. The first of these is nature study. School gardens allow children a multitude of experiences, such as getting outside, preparing soil, planting seeds, and observing and cultivating plants through the season. Participation in the cycle of growth allows for students to have a hands on experience with plant study.

Secondly, the garden has an important place in the study of geography. In home geography in the early grades children are required to visit the gardens and study the processes of cultivation and marketing the products. In this way, the principles of gardening lead to learning about agriculture, scientific farming, and fruit raising. Children can be taught about the principles involved in farming, the raising of corn and other grains, the feeding of cattle, dairying and butter-making, fruit-culture, as of berries, stone-fruits, apples, and pears. Scientific agriculture and fruit raising are based on principles of careful selection of seeds and of wise cultivation, of fertilizing and preserving soils, of grafting, pruning and caring for fruit trees, and dealing with insect pests.

The school garden has an important relation to esthetics and design.

Floriculture , landscape gardening , tree planting and fruit-culture appeal to the sense of beauty. The yard and garden together need to be planted and laid out on principles of taste and attractiveness.

Many progressive normal schools in all parts of the world are taking up the initiative of school gardens, both for the teachers and for the children.

School gardens can also be linked to the curriculum in any grade through science, social studies, math, arts, language arts and more. It has been seen to create a sense of community and is an example of location based learning. Having students garden is experiential learning which can involve the larger community through involving parents, community partners, and elders from the community. It creates an opportunity for intergenerational learning, where people of different ages can come together to grow food and work towards a sustainable environment and community.

Through school gardens, students learn to work the land and create a garden in which they can grow food such as lettuce, potatoes, kale, and peas. Students learn about local food and what grows in their environment. It helps to create a connection to food and get students thinking about where their food comes from and what it takes to grow it. It supports better nutrition in students and can incorporate lessons on healthy eating. This real-world, hands-on learning has proven to be very popular with students and schools. With this, the schoolyard can be an extension of the classroom. It connects students to the natural world and helps create responsible caretakers of the planet. School gardens ultimately contribute to connections between students, teachers, community, food, nature, and sustainability.

STEM education [ edit ] School gardens can extend far beyond the growing of vegetables and produce to incorporate more complex ecological STEM systems. By adding rainwater collection systems, photovoltaic panels , composting systems, methane digesters , tiny houses, and other circular systems, a school garden can begin to function as a robust educational land lab . Food, energy, shelter, sanitation, and water can all be provisioned in a school garden that has the right circular systems in operation.

A school garden can be a powerful STEM instructional component within a larger educational land lab.  Ecology, biology, agriculture, energy systems, culinary arts, climate science, soil science, and animal husbandry can all function as cross-curricular topics within a school garden land lab.

Effects [ edit ] Some studies suggest that school gardening programs benefit children's dietary behavior. The experiential nature of cultivating school gardens has allowed it to be effective in increasing their preference and consumption of fruits and vegetables.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Hence, they are possible initiatives to combat modern health problems, such as food insecurity and childhood obesity.

[ 5 ] However, more quantitative research is needed to prove school gardens' beneficial effects on children's health and well-being.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] List of garden types References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Charles Alexander McMurry (1914).

"School-Garden, The" . In Beach, Chandler B. (ed.).

The New Student's Reference Work . Chicago: F. E. Compton and Co.

^ a b Ohly, Heather; Gentry, Sarah; Wigglesworth, Rachel; Bethel, Alison; Lovell, Rebecca; Garside, Ruth (2016-03-25).

"A systematic review of the health and well-being impacts of school gardening: synthesis of quantitative and qualitative evidence" .

BMC Public Health .

16 (1): 286.

doi : 10.1186/s12889-016-2941-0 .

ISSN 1471-2458 .

PMC 4807565 .

PMID 27015672 .

^ Ozer, Emily J. (2007-12-01).

"The Effects of School Gardens on Students and Schools: Conceptualization and Considerations for Maximizing Healthy Development" .

Health Education & Behavior .

34 (6): 846– 863.

doi : 10.1177/1090198106289002 .

ISSN 1090-1981 .

PMID 16861584 .

^ Varman, Sumantla D.; Cliff, Dylan P.; Jones, Rachel A.; Hammersley, Megan L.; Zhang, Zhiguang; Charlton, Karen; Kelly, Bridget (2021-10-15).

"Experiential Learning Interventions and Healthy Eating Outcomes in Children: A Systematic Literature Review" .

International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health .

18 (20): 10824.

doi : 10.3390/ijerph182010824 .

ISSN 1661-7827 .

PMC 8535521 .

PMID 34682570 .

^ Davis, Jaimie N; Spaniol, Mackenzie R; Somerset, Shawn (2015).

"Sustenance and sustainability: maximizing the impact of school gardens on health outcomes" .

Public Health Nutrition .

18 (13): 2358– 2367.

doi : 10.1017/S1368980015000221 .

ISSN 1368-9800 .

PMC 10271796 .

PMID 25704784 .

^ Holloway, Timothy P.; Dalton, Lisa; Hughes, Roger; Jayasinghe, Sisitha; Patterson, Kira A. E.; Murray, Sandra; Soward, Robert; Byrne, Nuala M.; Hills, Andrew P.; Ahuja, Kiran D. K. (2023-02-27).

"School Gardening and Health and Well-Being of School-Aged Children: A Realist Synthesis" .

Nutrients .

15 (5): 1190.

doi : 10.3390/nu15051190 .

ISSN 2072-6643 .

PMC 10005652 .

PMID 36904189 .

External links [ edit ] Henry Lincoln Clapp (February 1898).

"School Gardens" .

Popular Science Monthly . Vol. 52.

v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject Portals : Agriculture Biology Food Plants Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=School_garden&oldid=1306230770 " Categories : Primary education Agricultural education Types of garden Hidden categories: Wikipedia introduction cleanup from August 2022 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from August 2022 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles needing additional references from January 2024 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing copy edit from January 2024 All Wikipedia articles needing copy edit Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2024 Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW with an wstitle parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Popular Science Monthly This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 16:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents School garden 7 languages Add topic

