Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 See also 2 External links Toggle the table of contents Vascular tissue 38 languages العربية অসমীয়া Asturianu বাংলা Български Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Gaeilge Galego Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski ქართული Қазақша Latviešu മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokmål Polski Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Conducting tissue in vascular plants This article is about vascular tissue in plants. For transportation in animals, see Circulatory system .

Cross section of celery stalk, showing vascular bundles, which include both phloem and xylem Detail of the vasculature of a bramble leaf Translocation in vascular plants Vascular tissue is a complex transporting tissue , formed of more than one cell type, found in vascular plants . The primary components of vascular tissue are the xylem and phloem . These two tissues transport fluid and nutrients internally. There are also two meristems associated with vascular tissue: the vascular cambium and the cork cambium . All the vascular tissues within a particular plant together constitute the vascular tissue system of that plant.

The cells in vascular tissue are typically long and slender. Since the xylem and phloem function in the conduction of water, minerals, and nutrients throughout the plant, it is not surprising that their form should be similar to pipes. The individual cells of phloem are connected end-to-end, just as the sections of a pipe might be. As the plant grows, new vascular tissue differentiates in the growing tips of the plant. The new tissue is aligned with existing vascular tissue, maintaining its connection throughout the plant. The vascular tissue in plants is arranged in long, discrete strands called vascular bundles . These bundles include both xylem and phloem, as well as supporting and protective cells. In stems and roots , the xylem typically lies closer to the interior of the stem with phloem towards the exterior of the stem. In the stems of some Asterales dicots , there may be phloem located inwardly from the xylem as well.

Between the xylem and phloem is a meristem called the vascular cambium. This tissue divides off cells that will become additional xylem and phloem. This growth increases the girth of the plant, rather than its length. As long as the vascular cambium continues to produce new cells, the plant will continue to grow more stout. In trees and other plants that develop wood , the vascular cambium allows the expansion of vascular tissue that produces woody growth. Because this growth ruptures the epidermis of the stem, woody plants also have a cork cambium that develops among the phloem. The cork cambium gives rise to thickened cork cells to protect the surface of the plant and reduce water loss. Both the production of wood and the production of cork are forms of secondary growth .

In leaves , the vascular bundles are located among the spongy mesophyll . The xylem is oriented toward the adaxial surface of the leaf (usually the upper side), and phloem is oriented toward the abaxial surface of the leaf. This is why aphids are typically found on the undersides of the leaves rather than on the top, since the phloem transports sugars manufactured by the plant and they are closer to the lower surface.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Xylem Phloem Cork cambium Vascular cambium Vascular plant Stele (biology) Circulatory system External links [ edit ] Intro to Plant Structure Contains diagrams of the plant tissues, listed as an outline.

v t e Biological tissues Animals Connective Epithelial Muscular Nervous Plants Dermal tissue : Epidermis Bulliform cell Cuticle Guard cell Pavement cell Subsidiary cell Periderm Phellem Phelloderm Vascular tissue : Phloem Companion cell Phloem fiber Phloem parenchyma Sieve tube Xylem Tracheid Vessel element Xylem fiber Xylem parenchyma Ground tissue : Parenchyma Aerenchyma Chlorenchyma Mesophyll Pith Collenchyma Sclerenchyma Fiber Sclereid Meristematic tissue : Primary Ground meristem Procambium Protoderm Secondary Cork cambium Vascular cambium Mixed : Cortex Endodermis Exodermis Stele Category Histology v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐759fc646c5‐d7brn
Cached time: 20250812162303
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.251 seconds
Real time usage: 0.341 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 650/1000000
Revision size: 3819/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 37562/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1061/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 24382/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.133/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 2725853/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  246.327      1 -total
 40.12%   98.835      1 Template:Biological_tissue
 38.31%   94.361      1 Template:Navbox
 29.02%   71.477      1 Template:Short_description
 17.02%   41.928      2 Template:Pagetype
 15.86%   39.075      1 Template:Citation_needed
 13.79%   33.971      1 Template:Fix
  9.40%   23.159      2 Template:Category_handler
  6.90%   17.000      1 Template:Botany
  6.80%   16.757      3 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3094833:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812162303 and revision id 1280036702. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vascular_tissue&oldid=1280036702 " Categories : Plant anatomy Plant physiology Tissues (biology) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2011 This page was last edited on 12 March 2025, at 02:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vascular tissue 38 languages Add topic

