Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of discovery 2 Characteristics Toggle Characteristics subsection 2.1 Anions and cations 2.2 Natural occurrences 3 Related technology Toggle Related technology subsection 3.1 Detection of ionizing radiation 4 Chemistry Toggle Chemistry subsection 4.1 Denoting the charged state 4.2 Sub-classes 4.3 Formation 4.3.1 Formation of monatomic ions 4.3.2 Formation of polyatomic ions 4.3.3 Ionization potential 4.4 Ionic bonding 4.5 Common ions 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Ion 120 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gaelg Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük 文言 West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Kumoring Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Anion ) Particle, atom or molecule with a net electrical charge For other uses, see Ion (disambiguation) .

Electron transfer from a neutral lithium (Li) atom on the left to a neutral fluorine (F) atom on the right would give a Li + and F − ions.

An ion ( / ˈ aɪ .

ɒ n , - ən / ) [ 1 ] is an atom or molecule with a net electrical charge . The charge of an electron is considered to be negative by convention and this charge is equal and opposite to the charge of a proton , which is considered to be positive by convention. The net charge of an ion is not zero because its total number of electrons is unequal to its total number of protons.

A cation is a positively charged ion with fewer electrons than protons [ 2 ] (e.g. K + ( potassium ion )) while an anion is a negatively charged ion with more electrons than protons [ 3 ] (e.g. Cl − ( chloride ion ) and OH − ( hydroxide ion )). Opposite electric charges are pulled towards one another by electrostatic force , so cations and anions attract each other and readily form ionic compounds . Ions consisting of only a single atom are termed monatomic ions , atomic ions or simple ions , while ions consisting of two or more atoms are termed polyatomic ions or molecular ions .

If only a + or − is present, it indicates a +1 or −1 charge, as seen in Na + ( sodium ion ) and F − ( fluoride ion ). To indicate a more severe charge, the number of additional or missing electrons is supplied, as seen in O 2− 2 ( peroxide , negatively charged, polyatomic) and He 2+ ( alpha particle , positively charged, monatomic).

[ 4 ] In the case of physical ionization in a fluid (gas or liquid), "ion pairs" are created by spontaneous molecule collisions, where each generated pair consists of a free electron and a positive ion.

[ 5 ] Ions are also created by chemical interactions, such as the dissolution of a salt in liquids, or by other means, such as passing a direct current through a conducting solution, dissolving an anode via ionization .

History of discovery The word ion was coined from neuter present participle of
Greek ἰέναι ( ienai ), meaning "to go". A cation is something that moves down ( Greek : κάτω , kato , meaning "down") and an anion is something that moves up ( Greek : ἄνω , ano , meaning "up"). They are so called because ions move toward the electrode of opposite charge. This term was introduced (after a suggestion by the English polymath William Whewell ) [ 6 ] by English physicist and chemist Michael Faraday in 1834 for the then-unknown species that goes from one electrode to the other through an aqueous medium.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Faraday did not know the nature of these species, but he knew that since metals dissolved into and entered a solution at one electrode and new metal came forth from a solution at the other electrode; that some kind of substance has moved through the solution in a current. This conveys matter from one place to the other. In correspondence with Faraday, Whewell also coined the words anode and cathode , as well as anion and cation as ions that are attracted to the respective electrodes.

[ 6 ] Svante Arrhenius put forth, in his 1884 dissertation, the explanation of the fact that solid crystalline salts dissociate into paired charged particles when dissolved, for which he would win the 1903 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.

[ 9 ] Arrhenius' explanation was that in forming a solution, the salt dissociates into Faraday's ions, he proposed that ions formed even in the absence of an electric current.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Characteristics Ions in their gas-like state are highly reactive and will rapidly interact with ions of opposite charge to give neutral molecules or ionic salts. Ions are also produced in the liquid or solid state when salts interact with solvents (for example, water) to produce solvated ions , which are more stable, for reasons involving a combination of energy and entropy changes as the ions move away from each other to interact with the liquid. These stabilized species are more commonly found in the environment at low temperatures. A common example is the ions present in seawater, which are derived from dissolved salts.

As charged objects, ions are attracted to opposite electric charges (positive to negative, and vice versa) and repelled by like charges. When they move, their trajectories can be deflected by a magnetic field .

Electrons, due to their smaller mass and thus larger space-filling properties as matter waves , determine the size of atoms and molecules that possess any electrons at all. Thus, anions (negatively charged ions) are larger than the parent molecule or atom, as the excess electron(s) repel each other and add to the physical size of the ion, because its size is determined by its electron cloud . Cations are smaller than the corresponding parent atom or molecule due to the smaller size of the electron cloud. One particular cation (that of hydrogen) contains no electrons, and thus consists of a single proton – much smaller than the parent hydrogen atom.

Anions and cations "Anion" redirects here. Not to be confused with the quasiparticle Anyon .

Hydrogen atom (center) contains a single proton and a single electron . Removal of the electron gives a cation (left), whereas the addition of an electron gives an anion (right). The hydrogen anion , with its loosely held two-electron cloud, has a larger radius than the neutral atom, which in turn is much larger than the bare proton of the cation. Hydrogen forms the only charge-+1 cation that has no electrons, but even cations that (unlike hydrogen) retain one or more electrons are still smaller than the neutral atoms or molecules from which they are derived.

Anion (−) and cation (+) indicate the net electric charge on an ion. An ion that has more electrons than protons, giving it a net negative charge, is named an anion, and a minus indication "Anion (−)" indicates the negative charge. With a cation it is just the opposite: it has fewer electrons than protons, giving it a net positive charge, hence the indication "Cation (+)".

Since the electric charge on a proton is equal in magnitude to the charge on an electron, the net electric charge on an ion is equal to the number of protons in the ion minus the number of electrons.

An anion (−) ( / ˈ æ n ˌ aɪ .

ən / ANN -eye-ən , from the Greek word ἄνω ( ánō ), meaning "up" [ 13 ] ) is an ion with more electrons than protons, giving it a net negative charge (since electrons are negatively charged and protons are positively charged).

[ 14 ] A cation (+) ( / ˈ k æ t ˌ aɪ .

ən / KAT -eye-ən , from the Greek word κάτω ( kátō ), meaning "down" [ 15 ] ) is an ion with fewer electrons than protons, giving it a positive charge.

[ 16 ] There are additional names used for ions with multiple charges. For example, an ion with a −2 charge is known as a dianion and an ion with a +2 charge is known as a dication . A zwitterion is a neutral molecule with positive and negative charges at different locations within that molecule.

[ 17 ] Cations and anions are measured by their ionic radius and they differ in relative size: "Cations are small, most of them less than 10 −10 m (10 −8 cm) in radius. But most anions are large, as is the most common Earth anion, oxygen . From this fact it is apparent that most of the space of a crystal is occupied by the anion and that the cations fit into the spaces between them." [ 18 ] The terms anion and cation (for ions that respectively travel to the anode and cathode during electrolysis) were introduced by Michael Faraday in 1834 following his consultation with William Whewell .

Natural occurrences Ions are ubiquitous in nature and are responsible for diverse phenomena from the luminescence of the Sun to the existence of the Earth's ionosphere . Atoms in their ionic state may have a different color from neutral atoms, and thus light absorption by metal ions gives the color of gemstones . In both inorganic and organic chemistry (including biochemistry), the interaction of water and ions is often relevant for understanding properties of systems; an example of their importance is in the breakdown of adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ), which provides the energy for many reactions in biological systems.

Related technology Ions can be non-chemically prepared using various ion sources , usually involving high voltage or temperature. These are used in a multitude of devices such as mass spectrometers , optical emission spectrometers , particle accelerators , ion implanters , and ion engines .

As reactive charged particles, they are also used in air purification by disrupting microbes, and in household items such as smoke detectors .

As signalling and metabolism in organisms are controlled by a precise ionic gradient across membranes , the disruption of this gradient contributes to cell death. This is a common mechanism exploited by natural and artificial biocides , including the ion channels gramicidin and amphotericin (a fungicide ).

Inorganic dissolved ions are a component of total dissolved solids , a widely known indicator of water quality .

Detection of ionizing radiation Schematic of an ion chamber, showing drift of ions. Electrons drift faster than positive ions due to their much smaller mass.

[ 5 ] Avalanche effect between two electrodes. The original ionization event liberates one electron, and each subsequent collision liberates a further electron, so two electrons emerge from each collision: the ionizing electron and the liberated electron.

The ionizing effect of radiation on a gas is extensively used for the detection of radiation such as alpha , beta , gamma , and X-rays . The original ionization event in these instruments results in the formation of an "ion pair"; a positive ion and a free electron, by ion impact by the radiation on the gas molecules. The ionization chamber is the simplest of these detectors, and collects all the charges created by direct ionization within the gas through the application of an electric field.

[ 5 ] The Geiger–Müller tube and the proportional counter both use a phenomenon known as a Townsend avalanche to multiply the effect of the original ionizing event by means of a cascade effect whereby the free electrons are given sufficient energy by the electric field to release further electrons by ion impact.

Chemistry Denoting the charged state Equivalent notations for an iron atom (Fe) that lost two electrons, referred to as ferrous .

When writing the chemical formula for an ion, its net charge is written in superscript immediately after the chemical structure for the molecule/atom. The net charge is written with the magnitude before the sign; that is, a doubly charged cation is indicated as 2+ instead of +2 . However, the magnitude of the charge is omitted for singly charged molecules/atoms; for example, the sodium cation is indicated as Na + and not Na 1+ .

An alternative (and acceptable) way of showing a molecule/atom with multiple charges is by drawing out the signs multiple times, this is often seen with transition metals. Chemists sometimes circle the sign; this is merely ornamental and does not alter the chemical meaning. All three representations of Fe 2+ , Fe ++ , and Fe ⊕⊕ shown in the figure, are thus equivalent.

Mixed Roman numerals and charge notations for the uranyl ion. The oxidation state of the metal is shown as superscripted Roman numerals, whereas the charge of the entire complex is shown by the angle symbol together with the magnitude and sign of the net charge.

Monatomic ions are sometimes also denoted with Roman numerals , particularly in spectroscopy ; for example, the Fe 2+ (positively doubly charged) example seen above is referred to as Fe(III) , Fe III or Fe III (Fe I for a neutral Fe atom, Fe II for a singly ionized Fe ion). The Roman numeral designates the formal oxidation state of an element, whereas the superscripted Indo-Arabic numerals denote the net charge. The two notations are, therefore, exchangeable for monatomic ions, but the Roman numerals cannot be applied to polyatomic ions. However, it is possible to mix the notations for the individual metal centre with a polyatomic complex, as shown by the uranyl ion example.

Sub-classes If an ion contains unpaired electrons , it is called a radical ion. Just like uncharged radicals, radical ions are very reactive. Polyatomic ions containing oxygen, such as carbonate and sulfate, are called oxyanions . Molecular ions that contain at least one carbon to hydrogen bond are called organic ions . If the charge in an organic ion is formally centred on a carbon, it is termed a carbocation (if positively charged) or carbanion (if negatively charged).

Formation Formation of monatomic ions Monatomic ions are formed by the gain or loss of electrons to the valence shell (the outer-most electron shell) in an atom. The inner shells of an atom are filled with electrons that are tightly bound to the positively charged atomic nucleus , and so do not participate in this kind of chemical interaction. The process of gaining or losing electrons from a neutral atom or molecule is called ionization .

Atoms can be ionized by bombardment with radiation , but the more usual process of ionization encountered in chemistry is the transfer of electrons between atoms or molecules. This transfer is usually driven by the attaining of stable ("closed shell") electronic configurations . Atoms will gain or lose electrons depending on which action takes the least energy.

For example, a sodium atom, Na, has a single electron in its valence shell, surrounding 2 stable, filled inner shells of 2 and 8 electrons. Since these filled shells are very stable, a sodium atom tends to lose its extra electron and attain this stable configuration, becoming a sodium cation in the process Na ⟶ ⟶ Na + + e − − {\displaystyle {\ce {Na -> Na+ + e-}}} On the other hand, a chlorine atom, Cl, has 7 electrons in its valence shell, which is one short of the stable, filled shell with 8 electrons. Thus, a chlorine atom tends to gain an extra electron and attain a stable 8- electron configuration , becoming a chloride anion in the process: Cl + e − − ⟶ ⟶ Cl − − {\displaystyle {\ce {Cl + e- -> Cl-}}} This driving force is what causes sodium and chlorine to undergo a chemical reaction, wherein the "extra" electron is transferred from sodium to chlorine, forming sodium cations and chloride anions. Being oppositely charged, these cations and anions form ionic bonds and combine to form sodium chloride , NaCl, more commonly known as table salt.

Na + + Cl − − ⟶ ⟶ NaCl {\displaystyle {\ce {Na+ + Cl- -> NaCl}}} Formation of polyatomic ions An electrostatic potential map of the nitrate ion ( 2NO − 3 ). The 3-dimensional shell represents a single arbitrary isopotential .

Polyatomic and molecular ions are often formed by the gaining or losing of elemental ions such as a proton, H + , in neutral molecules. For example, when ammonia , NH 3 , accepts a proton, H + —a process called protonation —it forms the ammonium ion, NH + 4 . Ammonia and ammonium have the same number of electrons in essentially the same electronic configuration , but ammonium has an extra proton that gives it a net positive charge.

Ammonia can also lose an electron to gain a positive charge, forming the ion NH + 3 . However, this ion is unstable, because it has an incomplete valence shell around the nitrogen atom, making it a very reactive radical ion.

Due to the instability of radical ions, polyatomic and molecular ions are usually formed by gaining or losing elemental ions such as H + , rather than gaining or losing electrons. This allows the molecule to preserve its stable electronic configuration while acquiring an electrical charge.

Ionization potential Main article: Ionization potential The energy required to detach an electron in its lowest energy state from an atom or molecule of a gas with less net electric charge is called the ionization potential , or ionization energy . The n th ionization energy of an atom is the energy required to detach its n th electron after the first n − 1 electrons have already been detached.

Each successive ionization energy is markedly greater than the last. Particularly great increases occur after any given block of atomic orbitals is exhausted of electrons. For this reason, ions tend to form in ways that leave them with full orbital blocks. For example, sodium has one valence electron in its outermost shell, so in ionized form it is commonly found with one lost electron, as Na + . On the other side of the periodic table, chlorine has seven valence electrons, so in ionized form it is commonly found with one gained electron, as Cl − . Caesium has the lowest measured ionization energy of all the elements and helium has the greatest.

[ 19 ] In general, the ionization energy of metals is much lower than the ionization energy of nonmetals , which is why, in general, metals will lose electrons to form positively charged ions and nonmetals will gain electrons to form negatively charged ions.

Ionic bonding Main article: Ionic bond Ionic bonding is a kind of chemical bonding that arises from the mutual attraction of oppositely charged ions. Ions of like charge repel each other, and ions of opposite charge attract each other. Therefore, ions do not usually exist on their own, but will bind with ions of opposite charge to form a crystal lattice . The resulting compound is called an ionic compound , and is said to be held together by ionic bonding . In ionic compounds there arise characteristic distances between ion neighbours from which the spatial extension and the ionic radius of individual ions may be derived.

The most common type of ionic bonding is seen in compounds of metals and nonmetals (except noble gases , which rarely form chemical compounds). Metals are characterized by having a small number of electrons in excess of a stable, closed-shell electronic configuration . As such, they have the tendency to lose these extra electrons in order to attain a stable configuration. This property is known as electropositivity . Non-metals, on the other hand, are characterized by having an electron configuration just a few electrons short of a stable configuration. As such, they have the tendency to gain more electrons in order to achieve a stable configuration. This tendency is known as electronegativity . When a highly electropositive metal is combined with a highly electronegative nonmetal, the extra electrons from the metal atoms are transferred to the electron-deficient nonmetal atoms. This reaction produces metal cations and nonmetal anions, which are attracted to each other to form a salt .

Common ions Common cations [ 20 ] Common name Formula Historic name Monatomic cations Aluminium Al 3+ Barium Ba 2+ Beryllium Be 2+ Calcium Ca 2+ Chromium(III) Cr 3+ Copper(I) Cu + cuprous Copper(II) Cu 2+ cupric Gold(I) Au + aurous Gold(III) Au 3+ auric Hydron H + Iron(II) Fe 2+ ferrous Iron(III) Fe 3+ ferric Lead(II) Pb 2+ plumbous Lead(IV) Pb 4+ plumbic Lithium Li + Magnesium Mg 2+ Manganese(II) Mn 2+ manganous Manganese(III) Mn 3+ manganic Manganese(IV) Mn 4+ Mercury(II) Hg 2+ mercuric Potassium K + kalic Silver Ag + argentous Sodium Na + natric Strontium Sr 2+ Tin (II) Sn 2+ stannous Tin(IV) Sn 4+ stannic Zinc Zn 2+ Polyatomic cations Ammonium NH + 4 Hydronium H 3 O + Mercury(I) Hg 2+ 2 mercurous Common anions [ 20 ] Formal name Formula Alt. name Monatomic anions Bromide Br − Carbide C − Chloride Cl − Fluoride F − Hydride H − Iodide I − Nitride N 3− Phosphide P 3− Oxide O 2− Sulfide S 2− Selenide Se 2− Polyatomic anions Azide N − 3 Peroxide O 2− 2 Triiodide I − 3 Oxoanions ( Polyatomic ions ) [ 20 ] Carbonate CO 2− 3 Chlorate ClO − 3 Chromate CrO 2− 4 Dichromate Cr 2 O 2− 7 Dihydrogen phosphate H 2 PO − 4 Hydrogen carbonate HCO − 3 bicarbonate Hydrogen sulfate HSO − 4 bisulfate Hydrogen sulfite HSO − 3 bisulfite Hydroxide OH − Hypochlorite ClO − chloroxide Monohydrogen phosphate HPO 2− 4 Nitrate NO − 3 Nitrite NO − 2 Perchlorate ClO − 4 Permanganate MnO − 4 Peroxide O 2− 2 Phosphate PO 3− 4 Sulfate SO 2− 4 Sulfite SO 2− 3 Superoxide O − 2 Thiosulfate S 2 O 2− 3 Silicate SiO 4− 4 Metasilicate SiO 2− 3 Aluminium silicate AlSiO − 4 Anions from organic acids Acetate CH 3 COO − ethanoate Formate HCOO − methanoate Oxalate C 2 O 2− 4 ethanedioate Cyanide CN − See also Air ioniser Aurora Electrolyte Gaseous ionization detector Ioliomics Ion beam Ion exchange Ionizing radiation Stopping power of radiation particles References ^ "ion" .

Collins English Dictionary .

HarperCollins .

"Collins English Dictionary | Always Free Online" . Archived from the original on 2013-12-24 . Retrieved 2013-12-21 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) .

^ "cation" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 2021-10-06 .

"Definition of CATION" . Archived from the original on 2021-10-06 . Retrieved 2021-10-06 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) .

^ "anion" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 2021-10-06 .

"Definition of ANION" . Archived from the original on 2021-10-06 . Retrieved 2021-10-06 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) .

^ "What Is an Ion? Definition and Examples" .

ThoughtCo .

Archived from the original on 2024-08-26 . Retrieved 2024-08-26 .

^ a b c Knoll, Glenn F. (1999).

Radiation Detection and Measurement (3rd ed.). New York: Wiley .

ISBN 978-0-471-07338-3 .

^ a b Frank A. J. L. James, ed. (1991).

The Correspondence of Michael Faraday, Vol. 2: 1832–1840 . p. 183.

ISBN 9780863412493 .

Archived from the original on 2021-04-14 . Retrieved 2020-10-16 .

^ Michael Faraday (1791–1867) . UK: BBC .

Archived from the original on 2016-08-25 . Retrieved 2019-12-21 .

^ "Online etymology dictionary" .

Archived from the original on 2011-05-14 . Retrieved 2011-01-07 .

^ "The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1903" .

nobelprize.org .

Archived from the original on 2018-07-08 . Retrieved 2017-06-13 .

^ Harris, William; Levey, Judith, eds. (1976).

The New Columbia Encyclopedia (4th ed.). New York City: Columbia University . p.

155 .

ISBN 978-0-231-03572-9 .

^ Goetz, Philip W. (1992). McHenry, Charles (ed.).

The New Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 1 (15 ed.). Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.

p. 587.

Bibcode : 1991neb..book.....G .

ISBN 978-0-85229-553-3 .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ Cillispie, Charles, ed. (1970).

Dictionary of Scientific Biography (1 ed.). New York City: Charles Scribner's Sons . pp.

296– 302.

ISBN 978-0-684-10112-5 .

^ Oxford University Press (2013).

"Oxford Reference: OVERVIEW anion" . oxfordreference.com.

Archived from the original on 2017-01-18 . Retrieved 2017-01-15 .

^ University of Colorado Boulder (November 21, 2013).

"Atoms and Elements, Isotopes and Ions" . colorado.edu.

Archived from the original on February 2, 2015 . Retrieved November 22, 2013 .

^ Oxford University Press (2013).

"Oxford Reference: OVERVIEW cation" . oxfordreference.com.

Archived from the original on 2017-01-18 . Retrieved 2017-01-15 .

^ Douglas W. Haywick, Ph.D.; University of South Alabama (2007–2008).

"Elemental Chemistry" (PDF) . usouthal.edu.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2011-12-04 . Retrieved 2013-11-22 .

^ Purdue University (November 21, 2013).

"Amino Acids" . purdue.edu.

Archived from the original on July 13, 2011 . Retrieved November 22, 2013 .

^ Press, Frank; Siever, Raymond (1986).

Earth (14th ed.). New York: W. H. Freeman and Company . p. 63.

ISBN 0-7167-1743-3 .

OCLC 12556840 .

^ Chemical elements listed by ionization energy Archived 2009-03-30 at the Wayback Machine . Lenntech.com ^ a b c "Common Ions and Their Charges" (PDF) .

Science Geek .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-02-18 . Retrieved 2018-05-11 .

v t e Branches of chemistry Glossary of chemical formulae List of biomolecules List of inorganic compounds Periodic table Analytical Calorimetry Characterization Chromatography GC HPLC Crystallography Electroanalytical methods Elemental analysis Instrumental chemistry Mass spectrometry EI ICP MALDI Separation process Spectroscopy IR Raman UV-Vis NMR Titration Wet chemistry Theoretical Computational chemistry Mathematical chemistry Molecular modelling Molecular mechanics Molecular dynamics Molecular geometry VSEPR theory Quantum chemistry Physical Chemical kinetics Chemical physics Molecular physics Chemical thermodynamics Cryochemistry Electrochemistry Spectroelectrochemistry Photoelectrochemistry Equilibrium chemistry Femtochemistry Interface and colloid science Micromeritics Mechanochemistry Microwave chemistry Photochemistry Sonochemistry Spectroscopy Spin chemistry Structural chemistry Surface science Thermochemistry Inorganic Ceramic chemistry Cluster chemistry Coordination chemistry Magnetochemistry Organometallic chemistry Organolanthanide chemistry Solid-state chemistry Organic Dynamic covalent chemistry Enantioselective synthesis Fullerene chemistry Organic reactions Organic synthesis Petrochemistry Physical organic chemistry Polymer chemistry Retrosynthetic analysis Stereochemistry Alkane stereochemistry Total synthesis / Semisynthesis Biological Biochemistry Molecular biology Cell biology Bioinorganic chemistry Bioorganic chemistry Bioorganometallic chemistry Biophysical chemistry Chemical biology Bioorthogonal chemistry Clinical chemistry Medicinal chemistry Pharmacology Neurochemistry Interdisciplinarity Nuclear chemistry Radiochemistry Radiation chemistry Actinide chemistry Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry Geochemistry Biogeochemistry Photogeochemistry Environmental chemistry Atmospheric chemistry Ocean chemistry Clay chemistry Carbochemistry Food chemistry Carbohydrate chemistry Food physical chemistry Agricultural chemistry Soil chemistry Chemistry education Amateur chemistry General chemistry Clandestine chemistry Forensic chemistry Forensic toxicology Post-mortem chemistry Nanochemistry Supramolecular chemistry Chemical synthesis Green chemistry Click chemistry Combinatorial chemistry Biosynthesis Chemical engineering Stoichiometry Materials science Metallurgy Ceramic engineering Polymer science See also History of chemistry Nobel Prize in Chemistry Timeline of chemistry of element discoveries " The central science " Chemical reaction Catalysis Chemical element Chemical compound Atom Molecule Ion Chemical substance Chemical bond Alchemy Quantum mechanics Category Commons Portal WikiProject v t e Electrochemical cells Types Galvanic cell Concentration cell Electric battery Flow battery Trough battery Fuel cell Thermogalvanic cell Voltaic pile Primary cell (non-rechargeable) Alkaline Aluminium–air Bunsen Chromic acid Clark Daniell Dry Edison–Lalande Grove Leclanché Lithium metal Lithium organic Lithium–air Mercury Metal–air electrochemical Nickel oxyhydroxide Silicon–air Silver oxide Weston Zamboni Zinc–air Zinc–carbon Secondary cell (rechargeable) Automotive Lead–acid gel–VRLA Lithium–air Lithium ion Dual carbon Lithium–iron–phosphate Lithium–polymer Lithium–sulfur Lithium–titanate Metal–air Molten salt Nanopore Nanowire Nickel–cadmium Nickel–hydrogen Nickel–iron Nickel–lithium Nickel–metal hydride Nickel–zinc Polysulfide–bromide Potassium ion Rechargeable alkaline Silver–cadmium Silver–zinc Sodium ion Sodium–sulfur Solid state Vanadium redox Zinc–bromine Zinc–cerium Other cell Atomic battery Radioisotope thermoelectric generator Fuel cell Solar cell Cell parts Anode Binder Catalyst Cathode Electrode Electrolyte Half-cell Ions Salt bridge Semipermeable membrane Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other IdRef Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐jp7qm
Cached time: 20250814215515
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.932 seconds
Real time usage: 1.151 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7746/1000000
Revision size: 32069/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 132336/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8688/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 141765/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.579/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23406304/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  939.297      1 -total
 25.08%  235.561      1 Template:Reflist
 21.94%  206.105     89 Template:Chem2
 13.35%  125.396      2 Template:Langx
  9.90%   92.959      2 Template:Navbox
  9.05%   85.028      1 Template:Branches_of_chemistry
  8.96%   84.178      1 Template:Cite_Collins_Dictionary
  8.79%   82.548      1 Template:Cite_dictionary
  7.93%   74.453     14 Template:Cite_web
  6.84%   64.242      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:18963787:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215515 and revision id 1292747294. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ion&oldid=1292747294#Anions_and_cations " Categories : Ions Physical chemistry Charge carriers Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1 errors: periodical ignored Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use British English from September 2016 Articles containing Greek-language text This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 16:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ion 120 languages Add topic

