Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Pollution control Toggle Pollution control subsection 2.1 Air quality 2.2 Water quality 2.3 Waste management 2.4 Contaminant cleanup 2.5 Chemical safety 3 Resource sustainability Toggle Resource sustainability subsection 3.1 Impact assessment 3.2 Water resources 3.3 Mineral resources 3.4 Forest resources 3.5 Wildlife and plants 3.6 Fish and game 4 Principles Toggle Principles subsection 4.1 Sustainable development 4.2 Equity 4.3 Transboundary responsibility 4.4 Public participation and transparency 4.5 Precautionary principle 4.6 Prevention 4.7 Polluter pays principle 5 Theory 6 International environmental law 7 Around the world Toggle Around the world subsection 7.1 Africa 7.2 Asia 7.3 European Union 7.4 Middle East 7.5 Oceania 7.6 Australia 7.7 Brazil 7.8 Canada 7.9 China 7.10 Congo (RC) 7.11 Ecuador 7.12 Egypt 7.13 India 7.14 Japan 7.15 New Zealand 7.16 Russia 7.17 Singapore 7.18 South Africa 7.19 United Kingdom 7.20 United States 7.21 Vietnam 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Environmental law 46 languages अंगिका العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা भोजपुरी Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Lietuvių Македонски മലയാളം Монгол Nederlands 日本語 پښتو Polski Português Русский සිංහල Simple English Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt West-Vlams Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of law concerning the natural environment For the journal, see Environmental Law (journal) .

Part of a series on Environmental law Pollution control law Environmental impact assessment Air quality law Water quality law Waste management law Environmental cleanup law Natural resources law Species protection Water resources law Mining law Forestry law Fisheries law Game law Reference materials Environmental journals International environmental agreements Environmental laws by country Environmental lawsuits Environmental ministries Supranational environmental agencies Related topics Administrative law Bankruptcy law Climate change litigation Earth jurisprudence Earth law Ecocide Energy law Environmental crime poaching Environmental personhood Environmental justice Insurance law International law Land law Land use Law of the sea Property law Public trust doctrine Rights of nature Right to a healthy environment War and environmental law Wild law v t e Environmental laws are laws that protect the environment.

[ 1 ] The term "environmental law" encompasses treaties , statutes , regulations , conventions , and policies designed to protect the natural environment and manage the impact of human activities on ecosystems and natural resources , such as forests , minerals , or fisheries. It addresses issues such as pollution control , resource conservation, biodiversity protection, climate change mitigation , and sustainable development . As part of both national and international legal frameworks, environmental law seeks to balance environmental preservation with economic and social needs, often through regulatory mechanisms, enforcement measures, and incentives for compliance.

The field emerged prominently in the mid-20th century as industrialization and environmental degradation spurred global awareness, culminating in landmark agreements like the 1972 Stockholm Conference and the 1992 Rio Declaration . Key principles include the precautionary principle , the polluter pays principle , and intergenerational equity . Modern environmental law intersects with human rights , international trade , and energy policy .

Internationally, treaties such as the Paris Agreement (2015), the Kyoto Protocol (1997), and the Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) establish cooperative frameworks for addressing transboundary issues. Nationally, laws like the UK's Clean Air Act 1956 and the US Toxic Substances Control Act of 1976 establish regulations to limit pollution and manage chemical safety. Enforcement varies by jurisdiction, often involving governmental agencies, judicial systems, and international organizations.

Environmental impact assessments are a common way to enforce environmental law.

Challenges in environmental law include reconciling economic growth with sustainability, determining adequate levels of compensation, and addressing enforcement gaps in international contexts. The field continues to evolve in response to emerging crises such as biodiversity loss , plastic pollution in oceans, and climate change .

History [ edit ] See also: List of years in the environment Examples of laws designed to preserve the environment for its own sake or for human enjoyment are found throughout history. In the common law , the primary protection was found in the law of nuisance , but this only allowed for private actions for damages or injunctions if there was harm to land. Thus, smells emanating from pigsties , [ 2 ] strict liability against dumping rubbish, [ 3 ] or damage from exploding dams.

[ 4 ] Private enforcement, however, was limited and found to be woefully inadequate to deal with major environmental threats , particularly threats to common resources. During the " Great Stink " of 1858, the dumping of sewerage into the River Thames began to smell so ghastly in the summer heat that Parliament had to be evacuated. Ironically, the Metropolitan Commission of Sewers Act 1848 had allowed the Metropolitan Commission for Sewers to close cesspits around the city in an attempt to "clean up" but this simply led people to pollute the river. In 19 days, Parliament passed a further Act to build the London sewerage system . London also suffered from terrible air pollution , and this culminated in the " Great Smog " of 1952, which in turn triggered its own legislative response: the Clean Air Act 1956 . The basic regulatory structure was to set limits on emissions for households and businesses (particularly burning of coal ) while an inspectorate would enforce compliance.

Pollution control [ edit ] Air quality [ edit ] Industrial air pollution now regulated by air quality law This paragraph is an excerpt from Air quality law .

[ edit ] Air quality laws govern the emission of air pollutants into the atmosphere . A specialized subset of air quality laws regulate the quality of air inside buildings . Air quality laws are often designed specifically to protect human health by limiting or eliminating airborne pollutant concentrations. Other initiatives are designed to address broader ecological problems, such as limitations on chemicals that affect the ozone layer , and emissions trading programs to address acid rain or climate change . Regulatory efforts include identifying and categorising air pollutants, setting limits on acceptable emissions levels, and dictating necessary or appropriate mitigation technologies.

Air quality index (AQI) is used to identify contaminants present in the air that would result in affecting public health.

[ 5 ] They test among contaminants and high levels of the major six pollutants, including nitrogen dioxide , ozone , carbon monoxide , and sulfur dioxide .

[ 6 ] The impacts on air quality reflect on the safety behind what contaminants are safe enough to breathe in. The high levels of pollutants can vary based on seasonal changes and what is more likely to cause an issue with air quality at its peak.

[ 5 ] Exposure to dangerous pollutants can adverse health effects over time, and can be a potential threat to a decline in population over time.

[ 7 ] Water quality [ edit ] A typical stormwater outfall, subject to water quality law This paragraph is an excerpt from Water quality law .

[ edit ] Water quality laws govern the protection of water resources for human health and the environment. Water quality laws are legal standards or requirements governing water quality , that is, the concentrations of water pollutants in some regulated volume of water. Such standards are generally expressed as levels of a specific water pollutants (whether chemical, physical, biological, or radiological) that are deemed acceptable in the water volume, and are generally designed relative to the water's intended use - whether for human consumption, industrial or domestic use, recreation, or as aquatic habitat. Additionally, these laws provide regulations on the alteration of the chemical, physical, radiological, and biological characteristics of water resources . Regulatory efforts may include identifying and categorizing water pollutants, dictating acceptable pollutant concentrations in water resources, and limiting pollutant discharges from effluent sources. Regulatory areas include sewage treatment and disposal , industrial and agricultural waste water management, and control of surface runoff from construction sites and urban environments. Water quality laws provides the foundation for regulations in water standards, monitoring, required inspections and permits, and enforcement. These laws may be modified to meet current needs and priorities.

[ 8 ] Waste management [ edit ] A municipal landfill, operated pursuant to waste management law This paragraph is an excerpt from Waste management law .

[ edit ] Waste management laws govern the transport, treatment, storage, and disposal of all manners of waste , including municipal solid waste , hazardous waste , and nuclear waste , among many other types . Waste laws are generally designed to minimize or eliminate the uncontrolled dispersal of waste materials into the environment. When left unregulated, these dispersals can cause ecological or biological harm. Most waste management laws are designed to reduce the generation of waste and promote or mandate waste recycling . Waste management laws also regulate organic waste disposal, including composting which is increasingly being recognized as a more sustainable alternative to landfilling and incineration . Regulatory efforts include classifying waste types, setting standards for transport, treatment, storage, and disposal, and establishing enforcement mechanisms.

Consuming less waste can heavily reduce the amount of energy used in products and help minimize consumption of goods over time.

[ 9 ] Waste separation could potentially lead to having additional resources and filter out waste during that process. Ways to reduce the amount of waste include green purchasing and reducing disposable products that contribute to climate change .

[ 9 ] Wealth has led to increase in environmental risks with waste produced including corporations, thus limiting the amount of regulation.

[ 10 ] Contaminant cleanup [ edit ] Oil spill emergency response, governed by environmental cleanup law This paragraph is an excerpt from Environmental cleanup law .

[ edit ] Environmental cleanup laws govern the removal of pollution or contaminants from environmental media such as soil , sediment , surface water , or ground water . Unlike pollution control laws, cleanup laws are designed to respond after-the-fact to environmental contamination, and consequently must often define not only the necessary response actions, but also the parties who may be responsible for undertaking (or paying for) such actions. Regulatory requirements may include rules for emergency response, liability allocation, site assessment, remedial investigation, feasibility studies, remedial action, post-remedial monitoring, and site reuse.

Sewage treatments are used for filtering out any contaminants that are present to ensure water quality remains clean and safe to consume.

[ 11 ] If left untreated for long period of time, antibiotic resistance may occur and will eventually cause health problems as the treatment plants won't get filtered easily.

[ 11 ] Government officials would need to test often to check the filtering system for efficiency. Wastewater and river ecosystems can effectively remove heavy metals such as lead and cadmium by using sea cucumbers , algae , and decayed plants to reduce the amount of heavy toxins that may be in water.

[ 12 ] Chemical safety [ edit ] Chemical safety laws govern the use of chemicals in human activities, particularly human-made chemicals in modern industrial applications. As contrasted with media-oriented environmental laws (e.g., air or water quality laws), chemical control laws seek to manage the (potential) pollutants themselves. Regulatory efforts include banning specific chemical constituents in consumer products (e.g., Bisphenol A in plastic bottles), and regulating pesticides .

[ 13 ] Safety regulations including the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) determine the chemicals that are considered harmful from the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) , but end up placing restrictions to several chemicals per year as opposed to finding many other chemicals that would be considered harmful if exposed.

[ 14 ] According to the EPA, only 200 out of the 84,000 chemicals used in 2013 were used for testing purposes, raising concerns on whether TSCA would be up to date in their database.

[ 14 ] Chemicals would need to be tested for toxicity , instability, and flammability when coming into contact with other chemicals.

[ 15 ] It is essential to identify and analyze the different types of chemicals for its potential risks or it could have dangerous outcomes.

[ 15 ] Resource sustainability [ edit ] Impact assessment [ edit ] This paragraph is an excerpt from Environmental impact assessment .

[ edit ] Environmental impact assessment (EIA) is the assessment of the environmental consequences of a plan, policy, program, or actual projects prior to the decision to move forward with the proposed action. In this context, the term "environmental impact assessment" is usually used when applied to actual projects by individuals or companies and the term " strategic environmental assessment " (SEA) applies to policies, plans and programmes most often proposed by organs of state.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] It is a tool of environmental management forming a part of project approval and decision-making.

[ 18 ] Environmental assessments may be governed by rules of administrative procedure regarding public participation and documentation of decision making, and may be subject to judicial review.

Water resources [ edit ] An irrigation ditch, operated in accordance with water resources law Main article: Water law Water resources laws govern the ownership and use of water resources , including surface water and ground water . Regulatory areas may include water conservation , use restrictions, and ownership regimes.

Such laws include the right to be provided clean water at the bare minimum, according to the United Nations Committee.

[ 19 ] Water resources should be safe, clean, accessible, and affordable for human concern.

[ 19 ] This also means having facilities that operate in combatting water pollution and provide clean sources of water for maintenance.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Duty dumping may occur if one is not held responsible for fulfilling their obligations in attempt to reduce environmental impact.

[ 20 ] Financial obligations are required for reaching quality standards to avoid risk of contamination that would raise public health concerns.

[ 19 ] An economic approach is made to provide a budget for having running water regulated normally and varies among countries distribution systems in efforts to reach human standards.

[ 19 ] Involvement is crucial for helping with water safety concerns, gaining attention of communities to help support programs established to further regulate water consumption.

[ 20 ] Mineral resources [ edit ] This paragraph is an excerpt from Mining law .

[ edit ] Mining law is the branch of law relating to the legal requirements affecting minerals and mining . Mining law covers several basic topics, including the ownership of the mineral resource and who can work them. Mining is also affected by various regulations regarding the health and safety of miners, as well as the environmental impact of mining.

Managing mineral resources can be challenging to maintain as supply chains have lower chances of traceability with importing goods from their designated spots for mining.

[ 21 ] Sustainability and quality processes can be done through regulatory obligations for ensuring the source of importing goods are taken responsibility.

[ 21 ] The risks that may be involved can include unsafe working conditions as mining is labor-intensive and workers' rights since environmental risks are likely to occur when mining, such as water contamination and ingesting minerals when exposed in the air.

[ 21 ] Mining conditions can vary by country as some prohibit mining if there are unsafe working conditions while some are likely to be interested as it adheres to investments for mining industries growing in the future.

[ 22 ] Forest resources [ edit ] A timber operation, regulated by forestry law Main article: Forestry law This paragraph is an excerpt from Forestry law .

[ edit ] Forestry laws govern activities in designated forest lands , most commonly with respect to forest management and timber harvesting .

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Forestry laws generally adopt management policies for public forest resources, such as multiple use and sustained yield .

[ 25 ] Forest management is split between private and public management, with public forests being sovereign property of the State. Forestry laws are now considered an international affair.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Governmental agencies are generally responsible for planning and implementing forestry laws on public forest lands, and may be involved in forest inventory , planning, and conservation , and oversight of timber sales.

[ 28 ] Forestry laws are also dependent on social and economic contexts of the region in which they are implemented.

[ 29 ] The development of scientific forestry management is based on the precise measurement of the distribution and volume of wood in a given parcel, the systematic felling of trees, and their replacement by standard, carefully aligned rows of mono-cultural plantations that could be harvested at set times.

[ 30 ] Wildlife and plants [ edit ] Wildlife laws govern the potential impact of human activity on wild animals, whether directly on individuals or populations, or indirectly via habitat degradation. Similar laws may operate to protect plant species. Such laws may be enacted entirely to protect biodiversity , or as a means for protecting species deemed important for other reasons. Regulatory efforts may include the creation of special conservation statuses , prohibitions on killing, harming, or disturbing protected species, efforts to induce and support species recovery, establishment of wildlife refuges to support conservation, and prohibitions on trafficking in species or animal parts to combat poaching .

Illegal wildlife trade has become an organized crime, and has led to tracking down poachers through law enforcement and high-level security approaches.

[ 31 ] Criminal activity involving animals have undergone pressure once regulation standards are established, having activities happen in other places to avoiding law enforcement.

[ 31 ] Conservationists may argue that it is risky that poachers are likely to be armed with weapons when law hunting down animals, leaving no choice but to recruit armed rangers for stopping their crimes.

[ 32 ] Tackling illegal wildlife crime would require involvement and support from international policies and law enforcement such as INTERPOL and EUROPOL .

[ 32 ] EUROPOL had to deal with political pressure to combat environmental crime, making it a priority to focus on.

[ 32 ] Ecological changes pertaining to human activity caused a decline in wildlife population over time.

[ 33 ] Relationships between humans and species result in negative outcomes of economic development and cultural significances.

[ 33 ] Fish and game [ edit ] Main article: Game law Further information: Fisheries law Fish and game laws regulate the right to pursue and take or kill certain kinds of fish and wild animal ( game ). Such laws may restrict the days to harvest fish or game, the number of animals caught per person, the species harvested, or the weapons or fishing gear used. Such laws may seek to balance dueling needs for preservation and harvest and to manage both environment and populations of fish and game. Game laws can provide a legal structure to collect license fees and other money which is used to fund conservation efforts as well as to obtain harvest information used in wildlife management practice.

Illegal fishing often gets unreported with little to no regulation for transporting goods in facilities.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Overfishing has impacted fisheries with a decline in economic growth and destruction of ecosystems.

[ 35 ] Marine resources would cause pressure among other countries relying on fishing for providing food in communities if illegal fishing isn't managed carefully.

[ 36 ] Another issue is an increase in marine pollution that has a decline of fish population with ocean disposals of toxic waste and lack of oxygen produced, which makes harvesting fish difficult to accomplish.

[ 37 ] Principles [ edit ] Environmental law has developed in response to emerging awareness of—and concern over—issues impacting the world. While laws have developed piecemeal and for a variety of reasons, some effort has gone into identifying key concepts and guiding principles common to environmental law as a whole.

[ 38 ] Some laws are seen as temporary or transitional where political realities prevent adoption of more ideal rules.

Pope Francis in his 2015 encyclical letter Laudato si' acknowledged that "political realism may call for transitional measures and technologies, so long as these are accompanied by the gradual framing and acceptance of binding commitments".

[ 39 ] The principles discussed below are not an exhaustive list and are not universally recognized or accepted. Nonetheless, they represent important principles for the understanding of environmental law around the world.

Sustainable development [ edit ] Main article: Sustainable development Defined by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) as "development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs," sustainable development may be considered together with the concepts of "integration" (development cannot be considered in isolation from sustainability) and "interdependence" (social and economic development, and environmental protection, are interdependent).

[ 40 ] Laws mandating environmental impact assessment and requiring or encouraging development to minimize environmental impacts may be assessed against this principle.

The modern concept of sustainable development was a topic of discussion at the 1972 United Nations Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm Conference), and the driving force behind the 1983 World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED, or Bruntland Commission). In 1992, the first UN Earth Summit resulted in the Rio Declaration , Principle 3 of which reads: "The right to development must be fulfilled so as to equitably meet developmental and environmental needs of present and future generations." Sustainable development has been a core concept of international environmental discussion ever since, including at the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Earth Summit 2002), and the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Earth Summit 2012, or Rio+20).

Equity [ edit ] Further information: Intergenerational equity Defined by UNEP to include intergenerational equity – "the right of future generations to enjoy a fair level of the common patrimony" – and intragenerational equity – "the right of all people within the current generation to fair access to the current generation's entitlement to the Earth's natural resources" – environmental equity considers the present generation under an obligation to account for long-term impacts of activities, and to act to sustain the global environment and resource base for future generations.

[ 41 ] Pollution control and resource management laws may be assessed against this principle.

Equity is approached by combatting social justice for the sake of reaching climate goals in having more sustainability.

[ 42 ] International law decided to shift from equality to equity in hopes of acknowledging the needs and provide fair share of resources.

[ 43 ] The CBDR principle had been established back in 2015, but was modified by the Paris Agreement regarding climate change.

[ 43 ] Transboundary responsibility [ edit ] Defined in the international law context as an obligation to protect one's own environment, and to prevent damage to neighboring environments, UNEP considers transboundary responsibility at the international level as a potential limitation on the rights of the sovereign state .

[ 44 ] Laws that act to limit externalities imposed upon human health and the environment may be assessed against this principle.

Community participation is analyzed through international law that looks into environmental law and cases such as genocide and providing aid.

[ 45 ] Such laws include heritage laws that describe the cultural aspect and property rights of others.

[ 45 ] Responsibilities include pollution damage among two states, leading to calamities for countries to deal with.

[ 46 ] Some countries contribute to transboundary pollution and pass on to other places to clean up, establishing laws to decide on holding countries liable on causing damage to resources.

[ 46 ] Having strict liability depends on negotiations done in international court and what values are held for environmental reasons.

[ 46 ] Public participation and transparency [ edit ] Identified as essential conditions for "accountable governments,...  industrial concerns", and organizations generally, public participation and transparency are presented by UNEP as requiring "effective protection of the human right to hold and express opinions and to seek, receive and impart ideas,... a right of access to appropriate, comprehensible and timely information held by governments and industrial concerns on economic and social policies regarding the sustainable use of natural resources and the protection of the environment, without imposing undue financial burdens upon the applicants and with adequate protection of privacy and business confidentiality," and "effective judicial and administrative proceedings". These principles are present in environmental impact assessment , laws requiring publication and access to relevant environmental data, and administrative procedure .

Participating has shown to be more effective when trying to reach a point and use strategic matters for implementing action within policies.

[ 47 ] Public policies that are managed for sustainability would need financial incentives since the work put into these cases require lots of support and looking into ecological systems.

[ 47 ] International relations will need a relationship between participating in policy changes and TGI governance involvement.

[ 47 ] Debates with international relations still occur, focusing on the importance of participating in protecting natural resources by being involved with government policies.

[ 47 ] Precautionary principle [ edit ] Main article: Precautionary principle One of the most commonly encountered and controversial principles of environmental law, the Rio Declaration formulated the precautionary principle as follows: In order to protect the environment, the precautionary approach shall be widely applied by States according to their capabilities. Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation . The principle may play a role in any debate over the need for environmental regulation.

Precautions are done in regards of having higher levels of protection among resources such as human health concerns and conservation for protecting the environment.

[ 48 ] According to the EU, it has not properly defined the meaning of precautionary principle since it depends on protection of resources and policies implemented.

[ 48 ] The CJEU expressed the concern of “where there is uncertainty as to the existence or extent of human health, the institutions may take protective measures without having to wait until the reality and seriousness of those risks become fully apparent." [ 48 ] Budgets are proposed for recovering any damages to resources done to communities in relation to water, air, and soil that may be impacted as a result of natural causes such as floods , droughts , hurricanes , and wildfires .

[ 49 ] Prevention [ edit ] The concept of prevention can perhaps better be considered an overarching aim that gives rise to a multitude of legal mechanisms, including prior assessment of environmental harm, licensing or authorization that set out the conditions for operation and the consequences for violation of the conditions, as well as the adoption of strategies and policies. Emission limits and other product or process standards, the use of best available techniques and similar techniques can all be seen as applications of the concept of prevention.

[ 50 ] Prevention is necessary to avoid resources destroyed and the amount of budgeting needed to recover from incidents so communities don't fall apart.

[ 51 ] Natural disasters are unavoidable by taking action before the incident happens can result in safe evacuations.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] They can be predicted based on people who had previously encountered with a natural disaster.

[ 52 ] Prevention from pollution can happen if policies are made to either ban substances or reduce the intake of contaminants in air, water, and soil for healthy conditions. Wildlife can be conserved through foreign aid and taking further action through funding programs that protect against poachers who may be armed and affiliate with an organization.

[ 53 ] Polluter pays principle [ edit ] Main article: Polluter pays principle The polluter pays principle is the idea that "the environmental costs of economic activities, including the cost of preventing potential harm, should be internalized rather than imposed upon society at large." [ 54 ] All issues related to responsibility for cost for environmental remediation and compliance with pollution control regulations involve this principle.

The rise of carbon emissions have resulted from corporations and facilities that fail to acknowledge the potential risks of climate change over time.

[ 55 ] Policies that cause environmental damage needs action done in hopes of preventing harm form happening again.

[ 55 ] Evidence of harm would need to be shown to see the damages done and how those get resolved.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] Government regulations may set aside the idea of conserving resources for their own benefit and not acknowledging those suffering from it.

[ 56 ] Theory [ edit ] Environmental law is a continuing source of controversy. Debates over the necessity, fairness, and cost of environmental regulation are ongoing, as well as regarding the appropriateness of regulations versus market solutions to achieve even agreed-upon ends.

Allegations of scientific uncertainty fuel the ongoing debate over greenhouse gas regulation, and are a major factor in debates over whether to ban particular pesticides.

[ 57 ] In cases where the science is well-settled, it is not unusual to find that corporations intentionally hide or distort the facts, or sow confusion.

[ 58 ] It is very common for regulated industry to argue against environmental regulation on the basis of cost.

[ 59 ] Difficulties arise in performing cost–benefit analysis of environmental issues.  It is difficult to quantify the value of an environmental value such as a healthy ecosystem, clean air, or species diversity. Many environmentalists' response to pitting economy vs. ecology is summed up by former Senator and founder of Earth Day Gaylord Nelson , "The economy is a wholly owned subsidiary of the environment, not the other way around." [ 60 ] Furthermore, environmental issues are seen by many as having an ethical or moral dimension, which would transcend financial cost. Even so, there are some efforts underway to systemically recognize environmental costs and assets, and account for them properly in economic terms.

While affected industries spark controversy in fighting regulation, there are also many environmentalists and public interest groups who believe that current regulations are inadequate, and advocate for stronger protection.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] Environmental law conferences – such as the annual Public Interest Environmental Law Conference in Eugene, Oregon – typically have this focus, also connecting environmental law with class, race, and other issues.

An additional debate is to what extent environmental laws are fair to all regulated parties. For instance, researchers Preston Teeter and Jorgen Sandberg highlight how smaller organizations can often incur disproportionately larger costs as a result of environmental regulations, which can ultimately create an additional barrier to entry for new firms, thus stifling competition and innovation.

[ 64 ] International environmental law [ edit ] See also: List of international environmental agreements Further information: Environmental protocol Global and regional environmental issues are increasingly the subject of international law . Debates over environmental concerns implicate core principles of international law and have been the subject of numerous international agreements and declarations.

Customary international law is an important source of international environmental law.  These are the norms and rules that countries follow as a matter of custom and they are so prevalent that they bind all states in the world.  When a principle becomes customary law is not clear cut and many arguments are put forward by states not wishing to be bound.  Examples of customary international law relevant to the environment include the duty to warn other states promptly about icons of an environmental nature and environmental damages to which another state or states may be exposed, and Principle 21 of the Stockholm Declaration ('good neighborliness' or sic utere).

Given that customary international law is not static but ever evolving and the continued increase of air pollution (carbon dioxide) causing climate changes, has led to discussions on whether basic customary principles of international law, such as the jus cogens (peremptory norms) and erga omnes principles could be applicable for enforcing international environmental law.

[ 65 ] Numerous legally binding international agreements encompass a wide variety of issue-areas, from terrestrial, marine and atmospheric pollution through to wildlife and biodiversity protection. International environmental agreements are generally multilateral (or sometimes bilateral ) treaties (a.k.a. convention, agreement, protocol, etc.).

Protocols are subsidiary agreements built from a primary treaty. They exist in many areas of international law but are especially useful in the environmental field, where they may be used to regularly incorporate recent scientific knowledge. They also permit countries to reach an agreement on a framework that would be contentious if every detail were to be agreed upon in advance.  The most widely known protocol in international environmental law is the Kyoto Protocol , which followed from the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change .

While the bodies that proposed, argued, agreed upon, and ultimately adopted existing international agreements vary according to each agreement, certain conferences, including 1972's United Nations Conference on the Human Environment , 1983's World Commission on Environment and Development , 1992's United Nations Conference on Environment and Development , and 2002's World Summit on Sustainable Development have been particularly important.

Multilateral environmental agreements sometimes create an International Organization, Institution or Body responsible for implementing the agreement. Major examples are the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) and the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).

International environmental law also includes the opinions of international courts and tribunals. While there are few and they have limited authority, the decisions carry much weight with legal commentators and are quite influential on the development of international environmental law. One of the biggest challenges in international decisions is to determine an adequate compensation for environmental damages.

[ 66 ] The courts include the International Court of Justice (ICJ), the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS), the European Court of Justice , European Court of Human Rights [ 67 ] and other regional treaty tribunals.

Previous research found that economic development level and the nations' moral value affected environmental regulation compliance. Developed countries like the US, EU, and Australia are urging for better laws targeting the reduction of harmful environmental impacts. It is worth noting that there is a direct correlation between economic development and the distance between law and ethics. Developed countries have a closer relationship between environmental laws and moral values. If a country's legal system is completely divorced from its moral values, people may not abide by the laws and they will lose their significance and effectiveness. Despite environmental regulations, the water in India's River Ganges remains poor as an example.

[ 68 ] Around the world [ edit ] See also: List of environmental laws by country and List of international environmental agreements Africa [ edit ] According to the International Network for Environmental Compliance and Enforcement (INECE), the major environmental issues in Africa are "drought and flooding , air pollution, deforestation , loss of biodiversity , freshwater availability, degradation of soil and vegetation, and widespread poverty." [ 69 ] The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is focused on the "growing urban and industrial pollution, water quality, electronic waste and indoor air from cookstoves." [ 70 ] They hope to provide enough aid on concerns regarding pollution before their impacts contaminate the African environment as well as the global environment.  By doing so, they intend to "protect human health, particularly vulnerable populations such as children and the poor." [ 70 ] In order to accomplish these goals in Africa, EPA programs are focused on strengthening the ability to enforce environmental laws as well as public compliance to them.  Other programs work on developing stronger environmental laws, regulations, and standards.

[ 70 ] Asia [ edit ] The Asian Environmental Compliance and Enforcement Network (AECEN) is an agreement between 16 Asian countries dedicated to improving cooperation with environmental laws in Asia. These countries include Cambodia, China, Indonesia, India, Maldives, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Nepal, Philippines, Pakistan, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Vietnam, and Lao PDR.

[ 71 ] European Union [ edit ] The European Union issues secondary legislation on environmental issues that are valid throughout the EU (so called regulations) and many directives that must be implemented into national legislation from the 27 member states (national states). Examples are the Regulation (EC) No. 338/97 on the implementation of CITES; or the Natura 2000 network the centerpiece for nature & biodiversity policy, encompassing the bird Directive (79/409/EEC/ changed to 2009/147/EC)and the habitats directive (92/43/EEC). Which are made up of multiple SACs (Special Areas of Conservation, linked to the habitats directive) & SPAs (Special Protected Areas, linked to the bird directive), throughout Europe.

EU legislation is ruled in Article 249 Treaty for the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU). Topics for common EU legislation are: Climate change Air pollution Water protection and management Waste management Soil protection Protection of nature , species and biodiversity Noise pollution Cooperation for the environment with third countries (other than EU member states) Civil protection In February 2024, the European Parliament adopted a law making a big, intentionally caused, environmental damage “comparable to ecocide ” a crime that can be punished by up to 10 years in prison. The members of the Union should enter it to their national law, during 2 years.

[ 72 ] The Parliament also approved a nature restoration law which obligate members to restore 20% of degraded ecosystems (including 30% of drained peatland) by 2030 and 100% by 2050.

[ 73 ] Middle East [ edit ] Environmental law is rapidly growing in the Middle East. The U.S.

Environmental Protection Agency is working with countries in the Middle East to improve "environmental governance, water pollution and water security, clean fuels and vehicles, public participation, and pollution prevention." [ 74 ] Oceania [ edit ] The main concerns about environmental issues in Oceania are "illegal releases of air and water pollutants , illegal logging /timber trade, illegal shipment of hazardous wastes , including e-waste and ships slated for destruction, and insufficient institutional structure/lack of enforcement capacity".

[ 75 ] The Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environmental Programme (SPREP) [ 76 ] is an international organization between Australia, the Cook Islands, FMS, Fiji, France, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, New Zealand, Niue, Palau, PNG, Samoa, Solomon Island, Tonga, Tuvalu, US, and Vanuatu. The SPREP was established in order to provide assistance in improving and protecting the environment as well as assure sustainable development for future generations.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] Australia [ edit ] Commonwealth v Tasmania (1983), also known as the "Tasmanian Dam Case", was a highly significant case in Australian environmental law.

[ 79 ] The Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 is the centerpiece of environmental legislation in Australia. It sets up the "legal framework to protect and manage nationally and internationally important flora, fauna, ecological communities and heritage places" and focuses on protecting world heritage properties, national heritage properties, wetlands of international importance, nationally threatened species and ecological communities, migratory species, Commonwealth marine areas, Great Barrier Reef Marine Park , and the environment surrounding nuclear activities.

[ 80 ] However, it has been subject to numerous reviews examining its shortcomings, the latest taking place in mid-2020.

[ 81 ] The interim report of this review concluded that the laws created to protect unique species and habitats are ineffective.

[ 82 ] Brazil [ edit ] The Brazilian government created the Ministry of Environment in 1992 in order to develop better strategies for protecting the environment, using natural resources sustainably, and enforcing public environmental policies.  The Ministry of Environment has authority over policies involving environment, water resources, preservation, and environmental programs involving the Amazon.

[ 83 ] Canada [ edit ] The Department of the Environment Act establishes the Department of the Environment in the Canadian government as well as the position Minister of the Environment .  Their duties include "the preservation and enhancement of the quality of the natural environment, including water, air and soil quality ; renewable resources, including migratory birds and other non-domestic flora and fauna; water; meteorology;" [ 84 ] The Environmental Protection Act is the main piece of Canadian environmental legislation that was put into place March 31, 2000. The Act focuses on "respecting pollution prevention and the protection of the environment and human health in order to contribute to sustainable development." [ 85 ] Other principle federal statutes include the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act , and the Species at Risk Act . When provincial and federal legislation are in conflict federal legislation takes precedence, that being said individual provinces can have their own legislation such as Ontario's Environmental Bill of Rights , and Clean Water Act .

[ 86 ] China [ edit ] See also: Ministry of Environmental Protection of the People's Republic of China According to the U.S.

Environmental Protection Agency , "China has been working with great determination in recent years to develop, implement, and enforce a solid environmental law framework. Chinese officials face critical challenges in effectively implementing the laws, clarifying the roles of their national and provincial governments, and strengthening the operation of their legal system." [ 87 ] Explosive economic and industrial growth in China has led to significant environmental degradation , and China is currently in the process of developing more stringent legal controls.

[ 88 ] The harmonization of Chinese society and the natural environment is billed as a rising policy priority.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] [ 91 ] Environmental lawsuits have been available in China since the early 2000s.

[ 92 ] : 15 Public protest, however, plays a greater role in shaping China's environmental policy than litigation does.

[ 92 ] : 15 Congo (RC) [ edit ] In the Republic of Congo , inspired by the African models of the 1990s, the phenomenon of constitutionalization of environmental law appeared in 1992, which completed an historical development of environmental law and policy dating back to the years of independence and even long before the colonization.

[ 93 ] It gives a constitutional basis to environmental protection, which traditionally was part of the legal framework.

[ 93 ] The two Constitutions of 15 March 1992 and 20 January 2002 concretize this paradigm, [ 93 ] by stating a legal obligation of a clean environment, [ 93 ] by establishing a principle of compensation and a foundation of criminal nature.

[ 94 ] By this phenomenon , Congolese environmental law is situated between non-regression and the search for efficiency." [ 94 ] Ecuador [ edit ] With the enactment of the 2008 Constitution , Ecuador became the first country in the world to codify the Rights of Nature . The Constitution, specifically Articles 10 and 71–74, recognizes the inalienable rights of ecosystems to exist and flourish, gives people the authority to petition on the behalf of ecosystems, and requires the government to remedy violations of these rights. The rights approach is a break away from traditional environmental regulatory systems, which regard nature as property and legalize and manage degradation of the environment rather than prevent it.

[ 95 ] The Rights of Nature articles in Ecuador's constitution are part of a reaction to a combination of political, economic, and social phenomena. Ecuador's abusive past with the oil industry , most famously the class-action litigation against Chevron , and the failure of an extraction-based economy and neoliberal reforms to bring economic prosperity to the region has resulted in the election of a New Leftist regime, led by President Rafael Correa , and sparked a demand for new approaches to development. In conjunction with this need, the principle of "Buen Vivir," or good living – focused on social, environmental and spiritual wealth versus material wealth – gained popularity among citizens and was incorporated into the new constitution.

[ 96 ] The influence of indigenous groups, from whom the concept of "Buen Vivir" originates, in the forming of the constitutional ideals also facilitated the incorporation of the Rights of Nature as a basic tenet of their culture and conceptualization of "Buen Vivir." [ 97 ] Egypt [ edit ] The Environmental Protection Law outlines the responsibilities of the Egyptian government to "preparation of draft legislation and decrees pertinent to environmental management, collection of data both nationally and internationally on the state of the environment, preparation of periodical reports and studies on the state of the environment, formulation of the national plan and its projects, preparation of environmental profiles for new and urban areas, and setting of standards to be used in planning for their development, and preparation of an annual report on the state of the environment to be prepared to the President." [ 98 ] India [ edit ] Main article: Indian environmental law In India , Environmental law is governed by the Environment Protection Act, 1986.

[ 99 ] This act is enforced by the Central Pollution Control Board and the numerous State Pollution Control Boards. Apart from this, there are also individual legislation specifically enacted for the protection of Water, Air, Wildlife, etc. Such legislations include : The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977 The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) (Union Territories) Rules, 1983 The Biological Diversity Act, 2002 and the Wild Life Protection Act, 1972 Batteries (Management and Handling) Rules, 2001 Recycled Plastics, Plastics Manufacture and Usage Rules, 1999 The National Green Tribunal established under the National Green Tribunal Act of 2010 [ 100 ] has jurisdiction over all environmental cases dealing with a substantial environmental question and acts covered under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974.

Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Rules, 1978 Ganga Action Plan, 1986 The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 Wildlife protection Act, 1972 The Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991 and the Biological Diversity Act, 2002. The acts covered under Indian Wild Life Protection Act 1972 do not fall within the jurisdiction of the National Green Tribunal.

[ 101 ] Appeals can be filed in the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India.

[ 102 ] Basel Convention on Control of Transboundary Movements on Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, 1989 and Its Protocols Hazardous Wastes (Management and Handling) Amendment Rules, 2003 [ 103 ] Japan [ edit ] The Basic Environmental Law is the basic structure of Japan's environmental policies replacing the Basic Law for Environmental Pollution Control and the Nature Conservation Law . The updated law aims to address "global environmental problems, urban pollution by everyday life, loss of accessible natural environment in urban areas and degrading environmental protection capacity in forests and farmlands." [ 104 ] The three basic environmental principles that the Basic Environmental Law follows are "the blessings of the environment should be enjoyed by the present generation and succeeded to the future generations, a sustainable society should be created where environmental loads by human activities are minimized, and Japan should contribute actively to global environmental conservation through international cooperation." [ 104 ] From these principles, the Japanese government have established policies such as "environmental consideration in policy formulation, establishment of the Basic Environment Plan which describes the directions of long-term environmental policy, environmental impact assessment for development projects, economic measures to encourage activities for reducing environmental load, improvement of social infrastructure such as sewerage system, transport facilities etc., promotion of environmental activities by corporations, citizens and NGOs, environmental education, and provision of information, promotion of science and technology." [ 104 ] New Zealand [ edit ] Main article: New Zealand environmental law The Ministry for the Environment and Office of the Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment were established by the Environment Act 1986 . These positions are responsible for advising the Minister on all areas of environmental legislation.  A common theme of New Zealand's environmental legislation is sustainably managing natural and physical resources, fisheries, and forests.  The Resource Management Act 1991 is the main piece of environmental legislation that outlines the government's strategy to managing the "environment, including air, water soil, biodiversity , the coastal environment, noise, subdivision, and land use planning in general." [ 105 ] Russia [ edit ] The Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment of the Russian Federation makes regulation regarding "conservation of natural resources, including the subsoil , water bodies, forests located in designated conservation areas, fauna and their habitat, in the field of hunting, hydrometeorology and related areas, environmental monitoring and pollution control, including radiation monitoring and control, and functions of public environmental policy making and implementation and statutory regulation." [ 106 ] Singapore [ edit ] Singapore is a signatory of the Convention on Biological Diversity ; with most of its CBD obligations being overseen by the National Biodiversity Reference Centre, a division of its National Parks Board ( NParks ).

[ 107 ] Singapore is also a signatory of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Animals , with its obligations under that treaty also being overseen by NParks.

[ 108 ] The Parliament of Singapore has enacted numerous pieces of legislation to fulfil its obligations under these treaties, such as the Parks and Trees Act, [ 109 ] Endangered Species (Import and Export) Act, [ 110 ] and Wildlife Act.

[ 111 ] The new Wildlife (Protected Wildlife Species) Rules 2020 marks the first instance in Singapore 's history that direct legal protection has been offered for specific named species, as listed in Parts 1-5 of the Rules' schedule.

[ 112 ] South Africa [ edit ] Main article: South African environmental law United Kingdom [ edit ] Main article: UK environmental law United States [ edit ] Main article: United States environmental law Vietnam [ edit ] Vietnam is currently working with the U.S.

Environmental Protection Agency on dioxin remediation and technical assistance in order to lower methane emissions . In March 2002, the U.S. and Vietnam signed the U.S.-Vietnam Memorandum of Understanding on Research on Human Health and the Environmental Effects of Agent Orange/Dioxin.

[ 113 ] See also [ edit ] Climate target Energy law Environmental health Environmental justice Environmental racism Environmental racism in Europe Indigenous rights International law List of environmental law journals List of international environmental agreements List of years in the environment UK enterprise law Notes [ edit ] ^ Phillipe Sands (2003) Principles of International Environmental Law. 2nd Edition. p. xxi Available at [1] Accessed 19 February 2020 ^ Aldred's Case (1610) 9 Co Rep 57b; (1610) 77 ER 816 ^ R v Stephens (1866) LR 1 QB 702 ^ Rylands v Fletcher [1868] UKHL 1 ^ a b Yu, Chunling; Morotomi, Toru (2022-03-15).

"The effect of the revision and implementation for environmental protection law on ambient air quality in China" .

Journal of Environmental Management .

306 : 114437.

Bibcode : 2022JEnvM.30614437Y .

doi : 10.1016/j.jenvman.2022.114437 .

ISSN 0301-4797 .

PMID 34998089 .

^ Scotford, Eloise (2020-12-24).

"Rethinking Clean Air: Air Quality Law and COVID-19" .

Journal of Environmental Law .

32 (3): 349– 353.

doi : 10.1093/jel/eqaa027 .

ISSN 0952-8873 .

PMC 7717344 .

^ Karimi, Afsaneh; Shirmardi, Mohammad; Hadei, Mostafa; Birgani, Yaser Tahmasebi; Neisi, Abdolkazem; Takdastan, Afshin; Goudarzi, Gholamreza (2019-09-30).

"Concentrations and health effects of short- and long-term exposure to PM2.5, NO2, and O3 in ambient air of Ahvaz city, Iran (2014–2017)" .

Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety .

180 : 542– 548.

doi : 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2019.05.026 .

ISSN 0147-6513 .

PMID 31128552 .

^ "WHO | Developing drinking-water quality regulations and standards" .

WHO . Archived from the original on July 15, 2018 . Retrieved 2020-11-08 .

^ a b Brož, David; Čábelková, Inna; Hlaváček, Martin; Smutka, Luboš; Procházka, Petr (2023-06-27).

"It starts from home? Explaining environmentally responsible resource and waste management" .

Frontiers in Environmental Science .

11 .

doi : 10.3389/fenvs.2023.1136171 .

ISSN 2296-665X .

^ Knol-Kauffman, Maaike; Solås, Ann-Magnhild; Arbo, Peter (2021-03-21).

"Government-industry dynamics in the development of offshore waste management in Norway: from prescriptive to risk-based regulation" .

Journal of Environmental Planning and Management .

64 (4): 649– 670.

Bibcode : 2021JEPM...64..649K .

doi : 10.1080/09640568.2020.1779676 .

hdl : 10037/19022 .

ISSN 0964-0568 .

^ a b Saxena, Priyam; Hiwrale, Isha; Das, Sanchita; Shukla, Varun; Tyagi, Lakshay; Pal, Sukdeb; Dafale, Nishant; Dhodapkar, Rita (2021-04-15).

"Profiling of emerging contaminants and antibiotic resistance in sewage treatment plants: An Indian perspective" .

Journal of Hazardous Materials .

408 : 124877.

Bibcode : 2021JHzM..40824877S .

doi : 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.124877 .

ISSN 0304-3894 .

PMID 33383454 .

^ Wei, Zihan; Van Le, Quyet; Peng, Wanxi; Yang, Yafeng; Yang, Han; Gu, Haiping; Lam, Su Shiung; Sonne, Christian (2021-02-05).

"A review on phytoremediation of contaminants in air, water and soil" .

Journal of Hazardous Materials .

403 : 123658.

Bibcode : 2021JHzM..40323658W .

doi : 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.123658 .

ISSN 0304-3894 .

PMID 33264867 .

^ "Environmental Law - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics" .

www.sciencedirect.com . Retrieved 2023-06-29 .

^ a b Vogel, David (2022).

"The Politics of preemption: American federalism and risk regulation" .

Regulation & Governance .

16 (4): 1160– 1173.

doi : 10.1111/rego.12414 .

ISSN 1748-5991 .

^ a b Sultana, Sharmin; Haugen, Stein (2022-01-05).

"Development of an inherent system safety index (ISSI) for ranking of chemical processes at the concept development stage" .

Journal of Hazardous Materials .

421 : 126590.

Bibcode : 2022JHzM..42126590S .

doi : 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.126590 .

hdl : 11250/2982018 .

ISSN 0304-3894 .

PMID 34332477 .

^ MacKinnon, A. J., Duinker, P. N., Walker, T. R. (2018). The Application of Science in Environmental Impact Assessment. Routledge.

^ Eccleston, Charles H. (2011).

Environmental Impact Assessment: A Guide to Best Professional Practices . Chapter 5.

ISBN 978-1439828731 ^ Caves, R. W. (2004).

Encyclopedia of the City . Routledge. p. 227.

^ a b c d e Benöhr, I. (2023-03-01).

"The Right to Water and Sustainable Consumption in EU Law" .

Journal of Consumer Policy .

46 (1): 53– 77.

doi : 10.1007/s10603-022-09532-5 .

ISSN 1573-0700 .

^ a b c Wargyawati, N. M. G.; Barba Lata, Iulian; Buizer, Marleen (2024-08-23).

"Which knowledge counts? Contested meanings of water quality, responsibility and involvement in river restoration discourse in Indonesia" .

Journal of Environmental Planning and Management .

67 (10): 2303– 2326.

Bibcode : 2024JEPM...67.2303W .

doi : 10.1080/09640568.2023.2185508 .

ISSN 0964-0568 .

^ a b c Schöneich, Svenja; Saulich, Christina; Müller, Melanie (October 2023).

"Traceability and foreign corporate accountability in mineral supply chains" .

Regulation & Governance .

17 (4): 954– 969.

doi : 10.1111/rego.12527 .

hdl : 10419/288220 .

ISSN 1748-5983 .

^ Sands, Anna (February 2023).

"Regulatory Chill and Domestic Law: Mining in the Santurbán Páramo" .

World Trade Review .

22 (1): 55– 72.

doi : 10.1017/S1474745622000386 .

ISSN 1474-7456 .

^ "Forestry regulation" .

www.dpi.nsw.gov.au . 2018 . Retrieved 2021-12-09 .

^ "What is Forestry Law? - Becoming a Forestry Lawyer" . Retrieved 2021-12-09 .

^ CIFOR (2006).

Justice in the forest: rural livelihoods and forest law enforcement . Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR).

doi : 10.17528/cifor/001939 .

^ Schmithüsen, Franz Josef (2007).

Multifunctional forestry practices as a land use strategy to meet increasing private and public demands in modern societies . ETH, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich, Department of Environmental Sciences, Institute for Human-Environmental Sciences.

OCLC 730303720 .

^ KAIMOWITZ, D. (2003). Forest law enforcement and rural livelihoods. The International Forestry Review, 5(3), 199–210.

http://www.jstor.org/stable/43740118 ^ Enters, Thomas; B. Durst, Patrick; B. Applegate, Grahame; C.S. Kho, Peter; Man, Gary (2001). "29. Policies, strategies and technologies for forest resource protection - William B. Magrath* and Richard Grandalski".

Applying Reduced Impact Logging to Advance Sustainable Forest Management . Kuching, Malaysia: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

^ "Principles of sustainable tropical forest management where wood production is the primary objective".

Guidelines for the management of tropical forests 1. The production of wood (FAO forestry paper 135) . Rome, Italy: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 1998.

^ "Why Is There No International Forestry Law?: An Examination of International Forestry Regulation, both Public and Private [eScholarship]" .

Escholarship.org .

doi : 10.5070/L5191019219 . Retrieved 2016-11-30 .

^ a b Iordăchescu, George; Lappe-Osthege, Teresa; Dickinson, Hannah; Duffy, Rosaleen; Burns, Charlotte (2023-07-29).

"Political ecologies of green-collar crime: understanding illegal trades in European wildlife" .

Journal of Environmental Politics .

32 (5): 923– 930.

Bibcode : 2023EnvPo..32..923I .

doi : 10.1080/09644016.2022.2156173 .

ISSN 0964-4016 .

^ a b c Duffy, Rosaleen (2022).

Security and Conservation: The Politics of the Illegal Wildlife Trade . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-23018-5 .

^ a b Lynch, Michael J.; Pires, Stephen F., eds. (2019).

Quantitative studies in green and conservation criminology: the measurement of environmental harm and crime . Green criminology. London New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-429-84423-2 .

^ Lynch, Michael J.; Pires, Stephen F., eds. (2019).

Quantitative studies in green and conservation criminology: the measurement of environmental harm and crime . Green criminology. London New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-429-84423-2 .

^ a b "President Biden Signs National Security Memorandum on Combating Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated Fishing and Associated Labor Abuses" .

American Journal of International Law .

116 (4): 858– 863. October 2022.

doi : 10.1017/ajil.2022.65 .

ISSN 0002-9300 .

^ Rothwell, Donald R.; Letts, David, eds. (2019-07-19).

Law of the Sea in South East Asia: Environmental, Navigational and Security Challenges (1 ed.). New York, NY : Routledge, 2019.: Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780429021053-5 .

ISBN 978-0-429-02105-3 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) ^ Kanazawa, Mark (2021-03-30), "Fisheries" , Natural Resources and the Environment (1 ed.), Abingdon, Oxon; New York, NY: Routledge, pp.

280– 297, doi : 10.4324/9780429022654-15 , ISBN 978-0-429-02265-4 , retrieved 2024-12-20 ^ For example, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) has identified eleven "emerging principles and concepts" in international environmental law, derived from the 1972 Stockholm Conference , the 1992 Rio Declaration , and more recent developments. UNEP, Training Manual on International Environmental Law (Chapter 3).

^ Pope Francis, Laudato si' , paragraph 180, published 24 May 2015, accessed 28 April 2024 ^ UNEP Manual , ¶¶ 12-19.

^ UNEP Manual , ¶¶ 20-23.

^ Amorim-Maia, Ana Terra; Anguelovski, Isabelle; Chu, Eric; Connolly, James (June 2024).

"Governing intersectional climate justice: Tactics and lessons from Barcelona" .

Environmental Policy and Governance .

34 (3): 256– 274.

doi : 10.1002/eet.2075 .

ISSN 1756-932X .

^ a b Čučković, Bojana (2019).

"From equality towards equity and differentiated responsibilities: A contemporary international environmental law perspective" .

Anali Pravnog fakulteta u Beogradu .

67 (3): 55– 72.

doi : 10.5937/AnaliPFB1903059C .

ISSN 0003-2565 .

^ UNEP Manual , ¶¶ 24-28.

^ a b Starrenburg, Sophie (September 2020).

"Lucas Lixinski, International Heritage Law for Communities: Exclusion and Re-Imagination, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2019, 320 pp, £80.00, ISBN 9780198843306" .

Leiden Journal of International Law .

33 (3): 815– 818.

doi : 10.1017/S0922156520000205 .

ISSN 0922-1565 .

^ a b c Hu, Xuyu (March 2020).

"The doctrine of liability fixation of state responsibility in the convention on transboundary pollution damage" .

International Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics .

20 (1): 179– 195.

Bibcode : 2020IEAPL..20..179H .

doi : 10.1007/s10784-019-09466-3 .

ISSN 1567-9764 .

^ a b c d de la Mora, Gabriela (April 2023).

"Conceptual and Analytical Diversity of Environmental Governance in Latin America: A Systematic Review" .

Environmental Management .

71 (4): 847– 866.

Bibcode : 2023EnMan..71..847D .

doi : 10.1007/s00267-022-01739-z .

ISSN 0364-152X .

PMID 36348074 .

^ a b c Paulini, Sophia (September 2020).

"Fact or Fiction? Case C-616/17 and the Compatibility of the EU Authorisation Procedure for Pesticides with the Precautionary Principle" .

European Journal of Risk Regulation .

11 (3): 481– 497.

doi : 10.1017/err.2020.19 .

ISSN 1867-299X .

^ Benöhr, I. (March 2023).

"The Right to Water and Sustainable Consumption in EU Law" .

Journal of Consumer Policy .

46 (1): 53– 77.

doi : 10.1007/s10603-022-09532-5 .

ISSN 0168-7034 .

^ UNEP Manual , ¶¶ 58.

^ a b McAllister, Jordan H.; bin Oslan, Afiq (2021-12-01).

"Issue ownership and salience shocks: The electoral impact of Australian bushfires" .

Electoral Studies .

74 : 102389.

doi : 10.1016/j.electstud.2021.102389 .

ISSN 0261-3794 .

^ a b McAllister, Jordan H.; bin Oslan, Afiq (2021-12-01).

"Issue ownership and salience shocks: The electoral impact of Australian bushfires" .

Electoral Studies .

74 : 102389.

doi : 10.1016/j.electstud.2021.102389 .

ISSN 0261-3794 .

^ Gamso, Jonas (March 2023).

"Aiding Animals: Does Foreign Aid Reduce Wildlife Crime?" .

The Journal of Environment & Development .

32 (1): 34– 60.

doi : 10.1177/10704965221134820 .

ISSN 1070-4965 .

^ Rio Declaration Principle 16; UNEP Manual ¶ 63.

^ a b c Rutherford, Angelica (2022-02-18).

"The Application of the Environment Act 2021 Principles to Carbon Capture and Storage" .

Laws .

11 (1): 15.

doi : 10.3390/laws11010015 .

ISSN 2075-471X .

^ a b Gardiner, Stephen M.; Obst, Arthur (2022-09-06).

Dialogues on Climate Justice (1 ed.). New York: Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9781003123408 .

ISBN 978-1-003-12340-8 .

^ See, e.g., DDT .

^ The Christian Science Monitor (22 June 2010).

"Merchants of Doubt" .

The Christian Science Monitor .

^ In the United States, estimates of environmental regulation total costs reach 2% of GDP . See Pizer & Kopp, Calculating the Costs of Environmental Regulation, 1 (2003 Resources for the Future) Archived 2009-03-26 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Nelson, Gaylord (November 2002).

Beyond Earth Day: Fulfilling the Promise . Wisconsin Press.

ISBN 978-0-299-18040-9 . Retrieved 2016-03-14 .

^ "Can the World Really Set Aside Half of the Planet for Wildlife?" .

Smithsonian .

^ "Climate Coalition Vows 'Peaceful, Escalated' Actions Until 'We Break Free from Fossil Fuels' " .

Common Dreams .

^ "A Guide to Environmental Non-Profits" .

Mother Jones .

^ Teeter, Preston; Sandberg, Jorgen (2016).

"Constraining or Enabling Green Capability Development? How Policy Uncertainty Affects Organizational Responses to Flexible Environmental Regulations" (PDF) .

British Journal of Management .

28 (4): 649– 665.

doi : 10.1111/1467-8551.12188 .

S2CID 157986703 .

^ Jesper Jarl Fanø (2019).  Enforcing International Maritime Legislation on Air Pollution through UNCLOS. Hart Publishing. Part IV (Ch. 16-18) ^ Hardman Reis, T., Compensation for Environmental Damages Under International Law , Kluwer Law International, The Hague, 2011, ISBN 978-90-411-3437-0 .

^ "ECtHR case-law factsheet on environment" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-11-10 . Retrieved 2012-11-08 .

^ Li, R.Y.M.; Li, Y.L.; Crabbe, M.J.C.; Manta, O.; Shoaib, M. The Impact of Sustainability Awareness and Moral Values on Environmental Laws. Sustainability 2021, 13, 5882.

https://doi.org/10.3390/su13115882 ^ "INECE Regions- Africa" . Archived from the original on 20 August 2002 . Retrieved 18 October 2012 .

^ a b c "Africa International Programs" . Environmental Protection Agency. Archived from the original on December 13, 2012 . Retrieved October 18, 2012 .

^ "AECEN" .

www.aecen.org . Archived from the original on 2015-09-06 . Retrieved 2015-08-27 .

^ Mølgaard Henriksen, Mette (27 February 2024).

" 'Revolutionary': EU Parliament votes to criminalise most serious cases of ecosystem destruction" . Euronews . Retrieved 28 February 2024 .

^ Niranjan, Ajit (27 February 2024).

"European parliament votes for watered-down law to restore nature" . The Guardian . Retrieved 28 February 2024 .

^ "EPA Middle East" . Environmental Protection Agency. Archived from the original on December 13, 2012 . Retrieved 23 October 2012 .

^ "INECE Regions - Asia and the Pacific" . Archived from the original on December 17, 2002 . Retrieved October 18, 2012 .

^ "Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environmental Programme (SPREP)" .

^ "Agreement Establishing SPREP" . Archived from the original on 2012-10-25 . Retrieved October 18, 2012 .

^ Taylor, Prue; Stroud, Lucy; Peteru, Clark (2013).

Multilateral Environmental Agreement Negotiator's Handbook: Pacific Region 2013 (PDF) . Samoa / New Zealand: Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme / New Zealand Centre for Environmental Law, University of Auckland.

ISBN 978-982-04-0475-5 .

^ Commonwealth v Tasmania (1983) 158 CLR 1 (1 July 1983) ^ "EPBC Act" . Retrieved October 18, 2012 .

^ "About the review" .

Independent review of the EPBC Act . 23 June 2020 . Retrieved 27 June 2020 .

^ Cox, Lisa (20 July 2020).

"Australia's environment in unsustainable state of decline, major review finds" .

the Guardian . Retrieved 27 July 2020 .

^ "Apresentação" . Retrieved 23 October 2012 .

^ "Department of the Environment Act" . 31 December 2002 . Retrieved 23 October 2012 .

^ "Environment Canada" . 2007-01-09 . Retrieved 23 October 2012 .

^ See Canada's Legal System Overview Archived 2017-08-22 at the Wayback Machine .

^ EPA, China Environmental Law Initiative .

^ Vermont Law School, China Partnership for Environmental Law Archived 2012-07-20 at the Wayback Machine ; C. McElwee, Environmental Law in China: Mitigating Risk and Ensuring Compliance .

^ NRDC, Environmental Law in China .

^ Wang, Alex (2013). "The Search for Sustainable Legitimacy: Environmental Law and Bureaucracy in China".

Harvard Environmental Law Review .

37 : 365.

SSRN 2128167 .

^ Rachel E. Stern, Environmental Litigation in China: A Study in Political Ambivalence (Cambridge University Press 2013) ^ a b Esarey, Ashley; Haddad, Mary Alice; Lewis, Joanna I.; Harrell, Stevan, eds. (2020).

Greening East Asia: The Rise of the Eco-Developmental State . Seattle: University of Washington Press .

ISBN 978-0-295-74791-0 .

JSTOR j.ctv19rs1b2 .

^ a b c d Nzaou-Kongo, Aubin (2016).

"L'ambivalence du droit de l'environnement en République du Congo" . Retrieved 15 January 2021 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ a b Nzaou-Kongo, Aubin (2014).

"La constitutionnalisation du droit de l'environnement au Congo-Brazzaville" . Retrieved 15 January 2021 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ "CELDF | Community Rights Pioneers | Protecting Nature and Communities" .

CELDF . Retrieved 2019-10-23 .

^ Gudynas, Eduardo . 2011. Buen Vivir: Today's Tomorrow Development 54(4):441-447.

^ Becker, Marc. 2011 Correa, Indigenous Movements, and the Writing of a New Constitution in Ecuador.

Latin American Perspectives 38(1):47-62.

^ "Law 4" . Retrieved 23 October 2012 .

^ "The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986" .

envfor.nic.in . Archived from the original on 2002-06-13 . Retrieved 2015-08-27 .

^ "The Gazette of India" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-08-10 . Retrieved 2014-05-27 .

^ "The Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972" .

envfor.nic.in . Retrieved 2015-08-27 .

^ Rhuks Temitope, "The Judicial Recognition and Enforcement of the Right to Environment: Differing Perspectives From Nigeria and India" , NUJS Law Review , March 11, 2020 ^ Surendra Malik, Sudeep Malik (2015).

Supreme Court on Environment Law (2015 ed.). India: EBC.

ISBN 9789351451914 .

^ a b c "The Basic Environment Law" . Retrieved 23 October 2012 .

^ "Ministry for the Environment" . Archived from the original on 30 November 2012 . Retrieved 23 October 2012 .

^ "Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment of the Russian Federation" . Retrieved 27 June 2015 .

^ Unit, Biosafety (2006-06-20).

"Singapore" .

www.cbd.int . Retrieved 2020-10-27 .

^ "National Parks Board (CITES)" .

customs.gov.sg . Retrieved 2020-10-27 .

^ "Parks and Trees Act - Singapore Statutes Online" .

sso.agc.gov.sg . Retrieved 2020-10-27 .

^ "Endangered Species (Import and Export) Act - Singapore Statutes Online" .

sso.agc.gov.sg . Retrieved 2020-10-27 .

^ "Wildlife Act - Singapore Statutes Online" .

sso.agc.gov.sg . Retrieved 2020-10-27 .

^ "Wildlife (Protected Wildlife Species) Rules 2020 - Singapore Statutes Online" .

sso.agc.gov.sg . Retrieved 2020-10-27 .

^ "Vietnam International Programs" . Environmental Protection Agency. Archived from the original on December 13, 2012 . Retrieved October 18, 2012 .

References [ edit ] Akhatov, Aydar (1996).

Ecology & International Law . Moscow: АST-PRESS. 512 pp.

ISBN 5-214-00225-4 (in English and Russian) Bimal N. Patel, ed. (2015). MCQ on Environmental Law.

ISBN 9789351452454 Farber & Carlson, eds. (2013).

Cases and Materials on Environmental Law, 9th . West Academic Publishing. 1008 pp.

ISBN 978-0314283986 .

Faure, Michael, and Niels Philipsen, eds. (2014).

Environmental Law & European Law . The Hague: Eleven International Publishing. 142 pp.

ISBN 9789462360754 (in English) Malik, Surender & Sudeep Malik, eds. (2015). Supreme Court on Environment Law.

ISBN 9789351451914 Martin, Paul & Amanda Kennedy, eds. (2015).

Implementing Environmental Law . Edward Elgar Publishing Further reading [ edit ] Around the world, environmental laws are under attack in all sorts of ways (30 May 2017), The Conversation External links [ edit ] International United Nations Environment Programme ECOLEX (Gateway to Environmental Law) Environmental Law Alliance Worldwide (E-LAW) Centre for International Environmental Law Wildlife Interest Group, American Society of International Law EarthRights International Interamerican Association for Environmental Defense United Kingdom Environmental Law Association Lexadin global law database Upholding Environmental Laws in Asia and the Pacific United States American Bar Association Section of Environment, Energy and Resources U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Environmental Law Institute (ELI) EarthJustice "Law Journals: Submission and Ranking, 2007-2014" , Washington and Lee University , Lexington, Virginia Canada West Coast Environmental Law (non-profit law firm) Ecojustice Canadian Environmental Law Association Environmental Law Centre (of Alberta) European Union Europa: Environmental rules of the European Union Europa: Summaries of Legislation - Environment Related articles v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline v t e United States environmental law Supreme Court decisions Missouri v. Holland (1920) Sierra Club v. Morton (1972) Vermont Yankee v. NRDC (1978) Hughes v. Oklahoma (1979) Lujan v. National Wildlife Federation (1990) Friends of the Earth v. Laidlaw Environmental Services (2000) BP P.L.C. v. Mayor and City Council of Baltimore (2021) NEPA cases United States v. SCRAP (1973) Metropolitan Edison Co. v. People Against Nuclear Energy (1983) Baltimore Gas & Electric Co. v. Natural Resources Defense Council (1983) Department of Transportation v. Public Citizen (2004) Norton v. Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance (2004) Winter v. Natural Resources Defense Council (2008) Monsanto Co. v. Geertson Seed Farms (2010) CAA cases Train v. Natural Resources Defense Council (1975) Chevron v. Natural Resources Defense Council (1984) Whitman v. American Trucking Associations (2001) Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation v. EPA (2004) Department of Transportation v. Public Citizen (2004) Massachusetts v. EPA (2007) Environmental Defense v. Duke Energy Corp.

(2007) American Electric Power Co. v. Connecticut (2011) Utility Air Regulatory Group v. EPA (2014) Michigan v. EPA (2015) HollyFrontier Cheyenne Refining v. Renewable Fuels Association (2021) West Virginia v. EPA (2022) RCRA cases City of Philadelphia v. New Jersey (1978) Southern Union Co. v. United States (2012) ESA cases Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill (1978) Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife (1992) Babbitt v. Sweet Home Chapter of Communities for a Great Oregon (1995) National Association of Home Builders v. Defenders of Wildlife (2007) Weyerhaeuser Company v. United States Fish and Wildlife Service (2018) United States Fish and Wildlife Service v. Sierra Club (2021) CWA cases United States v. Riverside Bayview (1985) SWANCC v. Army Corps of Engineers (2001) South Florida Water Management District v. Miccosukee Tribe (2004) S. D. Warren Co. v. Maine Board of Environmental Protection (2006) Rapanos v. United States (2006) National Association of Home Builders v. Defenders of Wildlife (2007) Entergy Corp. v. Riverkeeper Inc.

(2009) Coeur Alaska, Inc. v. Southeast Alaska Conservation Council (2009) Sackett v. EPA I (2012) Los Angeles County Flood Control District v. Natural Resources Defense Council (2013) Army Corps of Engineers v. Hawkes Co.

(2016) National Association of Manufacturers v. Department of Defense (2018) County of Maui v. Hawaii Wildlife Fund (2020) Sackett v. EPA II (2023) CERCLA cases United States v. Bestfoods (1998) Guam v. United States (2021) Major federal legislation , treaties, and lower court decisions Yellowstone National Park Protection Act (1872) Forest Service Organic Administration Act (1897) Rivers and Harbors Act (1899) Refuse Act Lacey Act (1900) Weeks Act (1911) North Pacific Fur Seal Convention of 1911 (1911) Weeks–McLean Act (1913) Migratory Bird Treaty Act (1918) Clarke–McNary Act (1924) Oil Pollution Act (1924) McSweeney-McNary Act (1928) Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act (1934) Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act (1954) Air Pollution Control Act (1955) Fish and Wildlife Act (1956) Oil Pollution Act (1961) Clean Air Act (1963, 1970, 1977, 1990) Acid Rain Program Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference v. Federal Power Commission (2nd Cir. Court of Appeals, 1965) Solid Waste Disposal Act (1965) Endangered Species Act (1969) Environmental Quality Improvement Act (1970) National Environmental Policy Act (1970) Clean Water Act (1972, 1977, 1987, 2014) Coastal Zone Management Act (1972) Coastal Zone Management Program Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (1972) Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act (1972) Noise Control Act (1972) Endangered Species Act (1973) Oil Pollution Act (1973) Safe Drinking Water Act (1974, 1986, 1996) Water Resources Development Act ( 1974 , 1976 , 1986 , 1988 , 1990 , 1992 , 1996 , 1999 , 2000 , 2007 , 2014, 2016, 2022) Federal Noxious Weed Act (1975) Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (1975) Magnuson–Stevens Act (1976) Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (1976) Toxic Substances Control Act (1976) Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (1977) Uranium Mill Tailings Radiation Control Act (1978) CERCLA (Superfund) (1980) Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (1986) Emergency Wetlands Resources Act (1986) Global Change Research Act (1990) National Environmental Education Act (1990) Oil Pollution Act (1990) Alien Species Prevention and Enforcement Act of 1992 Food Quality Protection Act (1996) Energy Policy Act (2005) Energy Independence and Security Act (2007) Coalition for Responsible Regulation, Inc. v. EPA (D.C. Cir. Court of Appeals, 2012) Lautenberg Chemical Safety Act (2016) America's Water Infrastructure Act (2018) Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (2021) Louisiana v. Biden (5th Cir. Court of Appeals, 2022) CHIPS and Science Act (2022) Inflation Reduction Act (2022) Federal agencies Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry Council on Environmental Quality National Highway Traffic Safety Administration Office of Surface Mining United States Environmental Protection Agency United States Fish and Wildlife Service U.S. Global Change Research Program Regulations and concepts Best available technology Citizen suit Clean Power Plan Corporate average fuel economy Discharge Monitoring Report Effluent guidelines Environmental crime Environmental impact statement Environmental justice Executive Order 13432 (2007) Executive Order 13990 (2022) LDV Rule (2010) Maximum contaminant level National Ambient Air Quality Standards National Climate Assessment National Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants National Priorities List New Source Performance Standards New Source Review Not-To-Exceed (NTE) PACE financing Presidential Climate Action Plan Renewable Fuel Standard Right to know Section 608 Certification Significant New Alternatives Policy State of the Climate Tailoring Rule (2010) Total maximum daily load Toxicity category rating Uranium Mill Tailings Remedial Action v t e Sustainability Outline Index Principles Anthropocene Environmentalism Global governance Human impact on the environment Planetary boundaries Development Consumption Anthropization Anti-consumerism Circular economy Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological footprint Ethical Green consumption Micro-sustainability Over-consumption Product stewardship Simple living Social return on investment Steady-state economy Sustainability Advertising Brand Marketing myopia Sustainable Consumer behaviour Market Systemic change resistance Tragedy of the commons World population Control Demographic transition Dependency ratio List Family planning Intergenerational equity Population ageing Sustainable population Technology Appropriate Environmental technology Natural building Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable industries Sustainable packaging Biodiversity Biosecurity Biosphere Conservation biology Endangered species Holocene extinction Invasive species Energy Carbon footprint Renewable energy Sustainable energy Food Civic agriculture Climate-smart agriculture Community-supported agriculture Cultured meat Sustainable agriculture Sustainable diet Sustainable fishery Water Air well (condenser) Bioretention Bioswale Blue roof Catchwater Constructed wetland Detention basin Dew pond Footprint Hydroelectricity Hydropower Infiltration basin Irrigation tank Marine energy Micro hydro Ocean thermal energy conversion Pico hydro Rain garden Rainwater harvesting Rainwater tank Reclaimed water Retention basin Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity Scarcity Security Small hydro Sustainable drainage system Tidal power Tidal stream generator Tree box filter Water conservation Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Water-sensitive urban design Accountability Corporate environmental responsibility Corporate social responsibility Environmental accounting Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental planning Generational accounting Sustainability Accounting Measurement Metrics and indices Reporting Standards and certification Sustainable yield Economic Debt Sustainability Analysis Fiscal sustainability Applications Advertising Art Business City Cultural sustainability Climate finance Community Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Eco-cities Eco-investing Eco-socialism Ecovillage Environmental finance Green economy Construction Fashion Finance Gardening Geopark Green Development Infrastructure Marketing Green roof Greening Impact investing Landscape Livelihood Living Market Organic movement Organizations Procurement Refurbishment Socially responsible business Socially responsible marketing Sanitation Sourcing Space Sustainability organization Tourism Transport Urban drainage systems Urban infrastructure Sustainable management Environmental Fisheries Forest Humanistic capitalism Landscape Materials Natural resource Planetary Recycling Waste Agreements and conferences UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972) Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983) Our Common Future (1987) Earth Summit (1992) Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (1992) Agenda 21 (1992) Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) Lisbon Principles (1997) Earth Charter (2000) UN Millennium Declaration (2000) Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg) UN Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012) Sustainable Development Goals (2015) UNESCO MONDIACULT conferences Category Lists Science Studies Degrees v t e Environmental humanities Art Crop art Environmental art Environmental sculpture Land art Landscape painting Photography conservation landscape nature wildlife Sculpture trail Site-specific art Sustainable art Culture Cultural ecology Cultural landscape Ecolinguistics Ecological anthropology Ecosemiotics Environmental anthropology Ethnoecology Traditional ecological knowledge Literature Ecocomposition Ecocriticism Ecopoetry Geocriticism Nature writing Outdoor literature Philosophy Aesthetics of nature Critical realism Deep ecology Ecofeminism Ecophenomenology Ecosophy Environmental ethics Environmental justice Environmental philosophy Predation problem Social ecology Religion Ecotheology Environmental theology Religion and environmentalism Spiritual ecology Stewardship Other Anthrozoology Ecomusicology Environmental communication Environmental education adult arts-based Environmental history Environmental interpretation Environmental journalism Environmental law Outdoor education Political representation of nature Psychogeography Thematic interpretation Related Animal studies Bioethics Biophilia hypothesis Do it yourself ( ethic ) Natural history ( museums ) Popular science Property theory ( common property ) Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Simple living Slow food Spirit of place Sustainability studies Applied Arts and Crafts movement Acoustic ecology Biomimicry Ecological design Ecomuseum Educational trail Environmental design Landscape architecture assessment planning Nature center New Urbanism Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable fashion Themed walk Environment portal Category Commons Journals Degrees Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9b85n
Cached time: 20250817231635
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.652 seconds
Real time usage: 1.952 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7204/1000000
Revision size: 83138/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 428065/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 78882/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 28/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 411278/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.123/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21228805/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1616.220      1 -total
 42.94%  694.009      1 Template:Reflist
 21.72%  351.041      7 Template:Excerpt
 19.51%  315.346     31 Template:Cite_journal
 10.69%  172.789     36 Template:Cite_web
  7.80%  126.058      2 Template:In_lang
  5.87%   94.884      1 Template:Navboxes
  5.32%   85.932     14 Template:Cite_book
  5.05%   81.671      1 Template:Environmental_law
  4.92%   79.586      1 Template:Sidebar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:10091:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817231635 and revision id 1306163561. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Environmental_law&oldid=1306163561 " Categories : Environmental law Environmental law schools Environmental social science Environmental protection Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles with Russian-language sources (ru) This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 08:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Environmental law 46 languages Add topic

