Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ancient moral intellectualism 2 Medieval theological intellectualism 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Intellectualism 30 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Shqip کوردی Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mental perspective Intellectualism is the mental perspective that emphasizes the use, development, and exercise of the intellect , and is identified with the life of the mind of the intellectual .

[ 1 ] In the field of philosophy , the term intellectualism indicates one of two ways of critically thinking about the character of the world: (i) rationalism , which is knowledge derived solely from reason ; and (ii) empiricism , which is knowledge derived solely from sense experience. Each intellectual approach attempts to eliminate fallacies that ignore, mistake, or distort evidence about "what ought to be" instead of "what is" the character of the world.

[ 2 ] Ancient moral intellectualism [ edit ] Main article: Moral intellectualism Socrates (c. 470 – 399 BC) The first historical figure who is usually called an "intellectualist" was the Greek philosopher Socrates (c. 470 – 399 BC), who taught that intellectualism allows that "one will do what is right or [what is] best, just as soon as one truly understands what is right or best"; that virtue is a matter of the intellect, because virtue and knowledge are related qualities that a person accrues, possesses, and improves by dedication to the use of reason .

[ 3 ] Philosopher Dominic Scott refers to a "standard criticism" of Socrates' attitude to human nature : that he treats human nature as more rational than it really is.

[ 4 ] Socrates's definition of moral intellectualism is a basis of the philosophy of Stoicism , wherein the consequences of that definition are called "Socratic paradoxes", such as "There is no weakness of will ", because a person either knowingly does evil or knowingly seeks to do evil (moral wrong); that anyone who does commit evil or seeks to commit evil does so involuntarily; and that virtue is knowledge, that there are few virtues, but that all virtues are one.

The concepts of truth and knowledge in contemporary philosophy are unlike Socrates's concepts of truth, knowledge, and ethical conduct, and cannot be equated with modern, post–Cartesian conceptions of knowledge and rational intellectualism.

[ 5 ] In that vein, by way of detailed study of history, Michel Foucault demonstrated that in classical antiquity (800 BC – AD 1000), "knowing the truth" was akin to "spiritual knowledge", which is integral to the principle of "caring for the self". In an effort to become a moral person the care for the self is realised through ascetic exercises meant to ensure that knowledge of truth was learned and integrated to the Self. Therefore, to understand truth meant possessing "intellectual knowledge" that integrated the self to the (universal) truth and to living an authentic life. Achieving that ethical state required continual care for the self, but also meant being someone who embodies truth, and so can readily practice the Classical -era rhetorical device of parrhesia : "to speak candidly, and to ask forgiveness for so speaking"; and, by extension, to practice the moral obligation to speak truth for the common good, even at personal risk.

[ 6 ] Medieval theological intellectualism [ edit ] Medieval theological intellectualism is a doctrine of divine action, wherein the faculty of intellect precedes, and is superior to, the faculty of the will ( voluntas intellectum sequitur ). As such, intellectualism is contrasted with voluntarism , which proposes the will as superior to the intellect, and to the emotions; hence, the stance that "according to intellectualism, choices of the Will result from that which the intellect recognizes as good; the will, itself, is determined. For voluntarism, by contrast, it is the Will which identifies which objects are good, and the Will, itself, is indetermined".

[ 7 ] From that philosophical perspective and historical context, the Spanish Muslim polymath Averroës (1126–1198) in the 12th century, the English theologian Roger Bacon , [ 8 ] the Italian Christian theologian Thomas Aquinas (1225–1274), and the German Christian theologian Meister Eckhart (1260–1327) in the 13th century, are recognised intellectualists.

[ 7 ] [ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-intellectualism Chinese intellectualism Intellectual Intellectual movements in Iran Intelligentsia Intelligence Quotient Scientia potentia est References [ edit ] ^ "Merriam-Webster" . 17 September 2024.

(Definition) ^ Some Problems of Philosophy , William James. Longman's, Green and Co.: New York, 1916, p. 221.

^ Giovanni Benzi (ed.).

"intellectualism" . Archived from the original on 2007-07-15.

(Definition and note on Socrates) ^ Scott, D. (2009), Plato's Meno , Cambridge University Press, p. 51, accessed on 30 December 2024 ^ Heda Segvic.

"No one Errs Willingly: The Meaning of Socratic Intellectualism" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-09-30.

^ Gros, Frederic (ed.)(2005) Michel Foucault: The Hermeneutics of the Subject , Lectures at the College de France 1981–1982. Picador: New York. p. 000.

^ a b "Voluntarism" . Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ The Heritage of the English-speaking Peoples and Their Responsibility: Addresses at the Conference : September 1947, Kenyon College . The College. 1948 . Retrieved 2023-06-27 .

^ Jeremiah Hackett, A Companion to Meister Eckhart , BRILL, 2012, p. 410.

v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal Authority control databases National Germany France BnF data Other IdRef Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Intellectualism&oldid=1276739355 " Categories : Intellectualism Academic terminology Intellectual history Intelligence Philosophy of education Rationalism Thought Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 February 2025, at 13:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Intellectualism 30 languages Add topic

