Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types 2 Gallery 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Sources 4.2 Citations 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Body of water 75 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Arpetan বাংলা Башҡортса भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Hausa हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska עברית ქართული Kaszëbsczi Кыргызча Latgaļu Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Русский Scots සිංහල Simple English SiSwati Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Võro Walon 吴语 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Betawi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Any significant accumulation of water, generally on a planet's surface For other uses, see Body of water (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Body water .

The Aubach , a watercourse in Germany A fjord ( Lysefjord ) in Norway .

A body of water or waterbody [ 1 ] is any significant accumulation of water on the surface of Earth or another planet. The term most often refers to oceans , seas , and lakes , but it includes smaller pools of water such as ponds , wetlands , or more rarely, puddles . A body of water does not have to be still or contained; rivers , streams , canals , and other geographical features where water moves from one place to another are also considered bodies of water.

[ 2 ] Most are naturally occurring and massive geographical features , but some are artificial. There are types that can be either. For example, most reservoirs are created by engineering dams , but some natural lakes are used as reservoirs . Similarly, most harbors are naturally occurring bays , but some harbors have been created through construction.

Bodies of water that are navigable are known as waterways . Some bodies of water collect and move water, such as rivers and streams, and others primarily hold water, such as lakes and oceans.

Bodies of water are affected by gravity, which is what creates the tidal effects.

[ 3 ] The impact of climate change on water is likely to intensify as observed through the rising sea levels , water acidification and flooding . This means that climate change has pressure on water bodies.

[ 4 ] Climate change significantly affects bodies of water through rising temperatures, altered precipitation patterns, and sea-level rise. Warmer temperatures lead to the melting of glaciers and polar ice, contributing to rising sea levels and affecting coastal ecosystems.

Freshwater bodies, such as rivers and lakes, are experiencing more frequent droughts, affecting water availability for communities and biodiversity. Moreover, ocean acidification , caused by increased carbon dioxide absorption, threatens marine ecosystems like coral reefs.

[ 5 ] Collaborative global efforts are needed to mitigate these impacts through sustainable water management practices.

[ 6 ] Types [ edit ] Bodies of water can be categorized into: Rain water Surface water Underground water There are some geographical features involving water that are not bodies of water, for example, waterfalls , geysers and rapids .

Description of main types of bodies of water Name Description Regions/dialects Allt Stream Scottish Highlands [ citation needed ] Arm of the sea also sea-arm , used to describe a sea loch .

Arroyo A usually-dry bed of a steep-sided stream, gully , or narrow channel that temporarily fills with water after heavy rain. See also wadi .

Southwest US Artificial lake or artificial pond see reservoir (impoundment).

Barachois A lagoon separated from the ocean by a sand bar .

Canada Basin Bay An area of water bordered by land on three sides, similar to, but smaller than a gulf .

Bayou A slow-moving stream or a marshy lake.

Southern US Beck (stream) or Beck (gill) A small stream (esp. with a rocky bottom); creek.

[ 7 ] Lincolnshire to Cumbria in areas which were once occupied by the Danes and Norwegians.

[ 8 ] Bight A large and often only slightly receding bay, or a bend in any geographical feature.

Billabong an oxbow lake ; a pond or still body of water created when a river changes course and some water becomes trapped.

Located in Australia Boil see seep Bog a type of wetland that accumulates peat due to incomplete decomposition of plant matter.

Bourne or Winterbourne a brook; stream; small, seasonal stream.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Chalk downland of southern England Broad A stationary inland body of fresh water Norfolk and Suffolk area; cf.

The Broads Brook A small stream; a creek.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Brooklet A small brook.

Burn A small stream; a brook.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Scotland and North East England .

[ 15 ] Canal an artificial waterway, usually connected to (and sometimes connecting) existing lakes, rivers, or oceans.

Channel the physical confine of a river, slough or ocean strait consisting of a bed and banks. See also stream bed and strait.

Cove a coastal landform . Earth scientists generally use the term to describe a circular or round inlet with a narrow entrance, though colloquially the term is sometimes used to describe any sheltered bay.

Creek a (narrow) stream that is smaller than a river; a minor tributary of a river; brook.

[ 21 ] Australia , Canada , New Zealand , United States Creek (tidal) an inlet of the sea, narrower than a cove.

[ 26 ] Mainly British Dam A dam is a barrier that stops or restricts the flow of surface water or underground streams, or water reservoir resulting from placing such a structure.

Delta the location where a river flows into an ocean, sea, estuary, lake, or reservoir.

Distributary or distributary channel a stream that branches off and flows away from the main stream channel.

Drainage basin a region of land where water from rain or snowmelt drains downhill into another body of water, such as a river, lake, or reservoir.

Draw a usually dry creek bed or gulch that temporarily fills with water after a heavy rain, or seasonally. See also wadi .

Dyke (UK) Either a narrow artificial channel off a river or broad for access or mooring, or a ditch (a water-filled drainage trench); not to be confused with Dyke (embankment) Used in The Broads Estuary a semi-enclosed coastal body of water with one or more rivers or streams flowing into it, and with a free connection to the open sea Firth Various coastal waters, such as large sea bays, estuaries, inlets, and straits.

Scottish Fjord ( fiord ) a narrow inlet of the sea between cliffs or steep slopes.

[ 27 ] Scandinavian Gill or Ghyll a narrow stream or rivulet; brook; narrow mountain stream.

[ 31 ] The north of England and Kent and Surrey influenced by Old Norse ; The variant "ghyll" is used in the Lake District and appears to have been an invention of William Wordsworth .

[ 32 ] Glacier a large collection of ice or a frozen river that moves slowly down a mountain.

Glacial pothole a giant's kettle .

Gulf a part of a lake or ocean that extends so that it is surrounded by land on three sides, similar to, but larger than a bay.

Harbor an artificial or naturally occurring body of water where ships are stored or may shelter from the ocean's weather and currents.

Hot spring a spring produced by the emergence of geothermally heated groundwater.

Impoundment an artificially-created body of water, by damming a source. Often used for flood control , as a drinking water supply (reservoir), recreation, ornamentation (artificial pond), or other purpose or combination of purposes. The process of creating an "impoundment" of water is itself called "impoundment".

Ice cap A body of frozen water less than 50,000 km 2 not constrained by topographical features (i.e., they will lie over the top of mountains) Ice field A body of frozen water constrained by topographical features Ice sheet A body of frozen water more than 50,000 km 2 Inlet a body of water, usually seawater , which has characteristics of one or more of the following: bay, cove, estuary, firth, fjord, geo, sea loch, or sound.

Kettle (or kettle lake) a shallow, sediment-filled body of water formed by retreating glaciers or draining floodwaters.

Kill a strait, river, or arm of the sea.

used in areas of Dutch influence in New York , New Jersey and other areas of the former New Netherland colony of Dutch America Lagoon a body of comparatively shallow salt or brackish water separated from the deeper sea by a shallow or exposed sandbank , coral reef , or similar feature.

Lake a body of water, usually freshwater, of relatively large size contained on a body of land.

Lick a small watercourse or an ephemeral stream Loch a body of water such as a lake, sea inlet, firth, fjord, estuary or bay.

Scottish Mangrove swamp a saline coastal habitat of mangrove trees and shrubs.

Marsh a wetland featuring grasses, rushes , reeds, typhas , sedges , and other herbaceous plants (possibly with low-growing woody plants ) in a context of shallow water. See also salt marsh .

Mediterranean sea (oceanography) a mostly enclosed sea that has a limited exchange of deep water with outer oceans and where the water circulation is dominated by salinity and temperature differences rather than winds Mere a lake or body of water that is broad in relation to its depth.

Mill pond a reservoir built to provide flowing water to a watermill .

Moat a deep, broad trench, either dry or filled with water, surrounding and protecting a structure, installation, or town.

Mud puddle Nant Stream Wales.

[ 33 ] Ocean a major body of salty water that, in totality, covers about 71% of the Earth's surface.

Oxbow lake a U-shaped lake formed when a wide meander from the mainstem of a river is cut off to create a lake.

Phytotelma a small, discrete body of water held by some plants.

Plunge pool a depression at the base of a waterfall.

Pool various small bodies of water such as a swimming pool , reflecting pool , pond, or puddle.

Pond a body of water smaller than a lake, especially those of artificial origin.

Port a maritime facility where ships may dock to load and discharge passengers and cargo.

Pothole see kettle Puddle a small accumulation of water on a surface, usually the ground.

Reflecting pool a water feature usually consisting of a shallow pool of water, undisturbed by fountain jets, for a reflective surface.

Reservoir a place to store water for various uses, especially drinking water, which can be a natural or artificial (see lake and impoundment).

Rill a shallow channel of running water. These can be either natural or human-made. Also: a very small brook; rivulet; small stream.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] River a natural waterway usually formed by water derived from either precipitation or glacial meltwater, and flows from higher ground to lower ground.

Rivulet (UK, US literary) a small or very small stream.

[ 36 ] Victorian era publications.

[ 37 ] Roadstead a place outside a harbor where a ship can lie at anchor; it is an enclosed area with an opening to the sea, narrower than a bay or gulf (often called a "roads").

Run a small stream or part thereof, especially a smoothly flowing part of a stream.

Salt marsh a type of marsh that is a transitional zone between land and an area, such as a slough, bay, or estuary, with salty or brackish water.

Sea a large expanse of saline water connected with an ocean, or a large, usually saline, lake that lacks a natural outlet such as the Caspian Sea and the Dead Sea . In common usage, often synonymous with the ocean.

Sea loch a sea inlet loch.

Sea lough a fjord, estuary, bay or sea inlet.

Seep a body of water formed by a spring.

Slough several different meanings related to wetland or aquatic features.

Source the original point from which the river or stream flows. A river's source is sometimes a spring .

Shoal a natural submerged ridge, bank, or bar that consists of, or is covered by, sand or other unconsolidated material, and rises from the bed of a body of water to near the surface.

Sound a large sea or ocean inlet larger than a bay, deeper than a bight, wider than a fjord, or it may identify a narrow sea or ocean channel between two bodies of land.

Spring a point where groundwater flows out of the ground, and is thus where the aquifer surface meets the ground surface Strait a narrow channel of water that connects two larger bodies of water, and thus lies between two land masses.

Stream a body of water with a detectable current, confined within a bed and banks.

Stream pool a stretch of a river or stream in which the water is relatively deep and slow moving.

Streamlet a small stream; rivulet.

[ 38 ] Subglacial lake a lake that is permanently covered by ice and whose water remains liquid by the pressure of the ice sheet and geothermal heating. They often occur under glaciers or ice caps.

Lake Vostok in Antarctica is an example.

Swamp a wetland that features permanent inundation of large areas of land by shallow bodies of water, generally with a substantial number of hummocks , or dry-land protrusions.

Syke [ 39 ] Stream Scottish Lowlands and Cumbria Swimming pool an artificial container filled with water intended for swimming.

Tank (or stock tank, Texas) an artificial pond, usually for watering cattle or other livestock.

[ 40 ] Tarn a mountain lake or pool formed in a cirque excavated by a glacier.

Tide pool a rocky pool adjacent to an ocean and filled with seawater.

Tributary or affluent a stream or river that flows into the main stem (or parent) river or a lake.

Vernal pool a shallow, natural depression in level ground, with no permanent above-ground outlet, that holds water seasonally.

Wadi a usually-dry creek bed or gulch that temporarily fills with water after a heavy rain, or seasonally Located in North Africa and Western Asia. See also arroyo (watercourse) .

Wash a usually dry creek bed or gulch that temporarily fills with water after a heavy rain, or seasonally. See also wadi .

Wetland an environment "at the interface between truly terrestrial ecosystems and truly aquatic systems making them different from each yet highly dependent on both".

[ 41 ] Classification of main types of bodies of water Name Running/Stationary/Wetland Running: Ephemeral/Perennial Stationary: Coastal/non-coastal Allt Running Arm of the sea Stationary Coastal Arroyo Running Ephemeral (seasonal) Artificial lake or artificial pond Stationary Barachois Stationary Coastal Basin Stationary Bay Stationary Coastal Bayou Wetland Beck (stream) or Beck (gill) Running Bight Stationary Coastal Billabong Stationary Boil Stationary Bog Stationary Bourne or Winterbourne Running Ephemeral [ 42 ] When permanent, they are chalk streams .

Broad Stationary Brook Running Brooklet Running Burn Running Canal Channel Cove Stationary Coastal Creek Running Creek (tidal) Dam Stationary Delta Coastal Distributary or distributary channel Running Drainage basin Draw Running Ephemeral Dyke (UK) Stationary Estuary Coastal Firth Stationary Coastal Fjord ( fiord ) Stationary Coastal Gill or Ghyll Running Glacier Technically running Glacial pothole Stationary Gulf Stationary Coastal Harbor Stationary Hot spring Running Impoundment Stationary Ice cap Ice field Stationary Ice sheet Inlet Stationary Coastal Kettle (or kettle lake) Stationary Kill Lagoon Stationary Lake Stationary Lick Stationary Loch Stationary Mangrove swamp Stationary Marsh Wetland Mediterranean sea (oceanography) Stationary Mere Stationary Mill pond Stationary Moat Stationary Mud puddle Stationary Nant Running Ocean Stationary Oxbow lake Stationary Phytotelma Plunge pool Stationary Pool Stationary Pond Stationary Port Stationary Pothole Stationary Puddle Stationary Reflecting pool Stationary Reservoir Stationary Rill Running River Running Rivulet Running Roadstead Stationary Run Running Salt marsh Stationary Sea Stationary Sea loch Stationary Coastal Sea lough Stationary Coastal Seep Stationary Slough Stationary Source Running Shoal Sound Stationary Coastal Spring Running Strait Stationary Stream Running Stream pool Stationary Streamlet Running Subglacial lake Stationary Swamp Wetland Syke [ 43 ] Running Seasonal Swimming pool Stationary Tank Stationary Tarn Stationary Tide pool Stationary Tributary or affluent Running Vernal pool Wetland Wadi Running Ephemeral Wash Running Ephemeral Wetland Wetland Gallery [ edit ] Port Jackson , Sydney , New South Wales The Canal Grande in Venice , one of the major water-traffic corridors in the city. View from the Accademia bridge .

A tide pool in Santa Cruz, California with sea anemones and sea stars A weir in Toledo, Spain . Weirs are frequently used to change the height of a riverlevel, prevent floodings, and measure water discharge.

See also [ edit ] Lakes portal Oceans portal Rivers portal Water portal Bank (geography) – Land alongside a body of water Bog – Type of wetland with peat-rich soil Fluvial processes – Sediment processes associated with rivers and streams Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Glossary of landforms Lists of bodies of water Port – Maritime facility where ships may dock to load and discharge passengers and cargo Water mass – Body of water with common formation history Water pollution – Contamination of water bodies References [ edit ] Sources [ edit ] Mitsch, W.J. and J.G. Gosselink. 2007.

Wetlands, 4th ed.

, John Wiley & Sons , Inc., New York, 582 pp.

[ 44 ] Citations [ edit ] ^ " waterbody noun (pl. - ies ) a body of water forming a physiographical feature, for example a sea or a reservoir." New Oxford Dictionary of English ^ Langbein, W.B.; Iseri, Kathleen T. (1995).

"Hydrologic Definitions: Stream" .

Manual of Hydrology: Part 1. General Surface-Water Techniques (Water Supply Paper 1541-A). Reston, VA: United States Geological Survey.

.

^ "What causes high tide and low tide? Why are there two tides each day?" .

HowStuffWorks . 21 May 2009 . Retrieved 10 December 2017 .

^ "European Environment Agency's home page – European Environment Agency" .

eea.europa.eu . Retrieved 2022-11-03 .

^ "Ocean acidification | National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" .

noaa.gov . Retrieved 2024-10-28 .

^ Lee, Hoesung (2023).

"Climate Change 2023 Synthesis Report" (PDF) .

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change : 18– 19.

^ "beck" .

collinsdictionary.com . Collins . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ "OED Online – Beck" . Oxford University Press. June 2017 . Retrieved 6 July 2017 .

^ "bourn" .

collinsdictionary.com . Collins . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ "bourn" .

oxforddictionaries.com .

Oxford University Press . Archived from the original on September 30, 2016 . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ "brook" . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ "OED Online – Brook" . Oxford University Press. June 2017 . Retrieved 6 July 2017 .

^ "burn" .

collinsdictionary.com . Collins . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ "burn" .

oxforddictionaries.com . Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on November 5, 2018 . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ "OED Online – Burn" . Oxford University Press. June 2017 . Retrieved 6 July 2017 .

^ "creek" .

oxforddictionaries.com . Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on September 24, 2016 . Retrieved 18 May 2019 .

British...especially an inlet...(whereas) NZ, North American, Australian...stream or minor tributary.

^ "(US) creek" .

English Oxford Living Dictionaries . Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on September 24, 2016 . Retrieved 18 May 2019 .

North American, Australian, NZ...A stream, brook, or minor tributary of a river.

^ "creek" .

Dictionary.com . Dictionary.com, LLC . Retrieved 18 May 2019 .

U.S., Canada, and Australia...a stream smaller than a river.

^ "creek" .

Collins . Retrieved 18 May 2019 .

US, Canadian, Australian and New Zealand a small stream or tributary ^ "creek" .

Macmillan Dictionary . Springer Nature Limited . Retrieved 18 May 2019 .

a narrow stream ^ [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] ^ "creek" .

oxforddictionaries.com . Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on September 24, 2016 . Retrieved 18 May 2019 .

British...especially an inlet ^ "creek" .

Dictionary.com . Dictionary.com, LLC . Retrieved 18 May 2019 .

Chiefly Atlantic States and British...a recess or inlet in the shore of the sea.

^ "creek" .

Macmillan Dictionary . Springer Nature Limited . Retrieved 18 May 2019 .

BRITISH a long narrow area of ocean stretching into the land ^ "creek" .

Collins . Retrieved 18 May 2019 .

Chiefly British a narrow inlet or bay ^ [ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] ^ "Definition of FJORD" . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 15 June 2017 .

^ "gill" . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ "gill" .

collinsdictionary.com . Collins . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ "gill" .

oxforddictionaries.com . Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on September 27, 2016 . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] ^ "OED Online – Gill" . Oxford University Press. June 2017 . Retrieved 6 July 2017 .

^ "OED Online – Nant" . Oxford University Press. June 2017 . Retrieved 6 July 2017 .

^ "rill" .

collinsdictionary.com . Collins . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ "rill" .

oxforddictionaries.com . Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on May 17, 2019 . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ "rivulet" .

dictionary.cambridge.org . Cambridge University Press . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ "OED Online – Rivulet" . Oxford University Press. June 2017 . Retrieved 6 July 2017 .

^ "streamlet" .

collinsdictionary.com . Collins . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ "OED Online – Sike" . Oxford University Press. June 2017 . Retrieved 6 July 2017 .

^ "Texas Primer: The Stock Tank" .

Texas Monthly . 1986-05-01 . Retrieved 2021-08-03 .

^ Mitsch & Gosselink, 1986 ^ "OED Online – Bourne" . Oxford University Press. June 2017 . Retrieved 6 July 2017 .

^ "OED Online – Sike" . Oxford University Press. June 2017 . Retrieved 6 July 2017 .

^ The first edition of Wetlands by Mitsch and Gosselink was published in 1986 by Van Nostrand Reinhold. Second, third, and fourth (current) editions were published in 1993, 2000, and 2007 respectively by John Wiley & Sons.

"Wiley: Wetlands, 4th Edition" . Archived from the original on 3 July 2012 . Retrieved 10 July 2012 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bodies of water .

Types of Water Bodies (archived 12 November 2011) v t e Rivers , streams and springs Rivers ( lists ) Alluvial river Braided river Blackwater river Channel Channel pattern Channel types Confluence Distributary Drainage basin Mountain river Subterranean river River bifurcation River ecosystem River source Tributary Streams Arroyo Beck Bourne Burn Chalk stream Coulee Current Stream bed Stream channel Streamflow Stream gradient Stream pool Perennial stream Winterbourne Springs ( list ) Estavelle/Inversac Geyser Holy well Hot spring list list in the US Karst spring list Mineral spring Ponor Rhythmic spring Spring horizon Sedimentary processes and erosion Abrasion Anabranch Aggradation Armor Bed load Bed material load Granular flow Debris flow Deposition Dissolved load Downcutting Erosion Headward erosion Knickpoint Palaeochannel Progradation Retrogradation Saltation Secondary flow Sediment transport Suspended load Wash load Water gap Fluvial landforms Ait Alluvial fan Antecedent drainage stream Avulsion Bank Bar Bayou Billabong Canyon Chine Cut bank Estuary Floating island Fluvial terrace Gill Gulch Gully Glen Meander scar Mouth bar Oxbow lake Riffle-pool sequence Point bar Ravine Rill River island Rock-cut basin Sedimentary basin Sedimentary structures Strath Thalweg River valley Wadi Fluvial flow Helicoidal flow International scale of river difficulty Log jam Meander Plunge pool Rapids Riffle Shoal Stream capture Waterfall list of waterfalls Whitewater Surface runoff Agricultural wastewater First flush Urban runoff Floods and stormwater 100-year flood Crevasse splay Flash flood Flood Urban flooding Non-water flood Flood barrier Flood control Flood forecasting Flood-meadow Floodplain Flood pulse concept Flooded grasslands and savannas Inundation Storm Water Management Model Return period Point source pollution Effluent Industrial wastewater Sewage River measurement and modelling Baer's law Baseflow Bradshaw model Discharge (hydrology) Drainage density Exner equation Groundwater model Hack's law Hjulström curve Hydrograph Hydrological model Hydrological transport model Infiltration (hydrology) Main stem Playfair's law Relief ratio River Continuum Concept Rouse number Runoff curve number Runoff model (reservoir) Stream gauge Universal Soil Loss Equation WAFLEX Wetted perimeter Volumetric flow rate River engineering Aqueduct Balancing lake Canal Check dam Dam Drop structure Daylighting Detention basin Erosion control Fish ladder Floodplain restoration Flume Infiltration basin Leat Levee River morphology Retention basin Revetment Riparian-zone restoration Stream restoration Weir River sports Canyoning Fly fishing Rafting River surfing Riverboarding Stone skipping Triathlon Whitewater canoeing Whitewater kayaking Whitewater slalom Related Aquifer Aquatic toxicology Body of water Hydraulic civilization Limnology Riparian zone River valley civilization River cruise Sacred waters Surface water Wild river Rivers by length Rivers by discharge rate Drainage basins Whitewater rivers Flash floods River name etymologies Countries without rivers Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Body_of_water&oldid=1302907078 " Category : Bodies of water Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2015 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 02:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Body of water 75 languages Add topic

