Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Founding 1.2 Merger with Cornell American 1.3 21st century 2 Cornell Insider 3 Management and operations Toggle Management and operations subsection 3.1 Notable alumni 4 See also 5 Footnotes 6 External links Toggle the table of contents The Cornell Review Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cornell University student newspaper This article is about the fortnightly newspaper founded in 1984 and is not to be confused with Cornell Law Review .

The Cornell Review Type Student published fortnightly Format Tabloid in newsprint Owner(s) Ithaca Review, Inc.

Editor Max Whalen Founded 1984 Political alignment Conservative , Libertarian Headquarters Ithaca, New York , U.S.

Circulation 2,000 [ citation needed ] Website thecornellreview.org The Cornell Review is an independent newspaper published by students of Cornell University in Ithaca, New York . With the motto, "We Do Not Apologize," the Review has a  history in conservative journalism and was once one of the leading college conservative publications in the United States. While the ideological makeup of its staff shifts over the years, the paper has consistently accused Cornell of adhering to left-wing politics and political correctness , delivered with a signature anti-establishment tone.

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] Founding [ edit ] The Cornell Review was founded on Cornell's Ithaca campus in 1984. Jim Keller, a government major, founded The Cornell Review during his senior year in the spring of 1984. The paper drew immediate and critical attention for its discordant rhetoric and "shock journalism".

Ann Coulter , then an undergraduate in the history department of the College of Arts and Sciences , served as its editor during the fall of 1984.

Much of the paper's structure in the early years was influenced by the unanticipated success of the Dartmouth Review at Dartmouth College , which inspired conservative students at other institutions to found similar newspapers. The Institute for Educational Affairs, founded in 1978 to assist conservative academics, created The Collegiate Network in 1984 to offer these groups technical and financial assistance.

[ 1 ] During the 1980s the Review targeted affirmative action , gay rights , communist sympathizers, abortion , and anti- apartheid activists, while defending the Reagan Administration , the Greek system , and the university administration (against striking workers). It notably criticized university-sponsored ethnicity -oriented residential communities, known as "program houses", as segregationist .

[ 2 ] In 1986, some students voiced their opposition to the paper by seeking out and shredding nearly every copy of one issue at a multitude of locations on campus during the early morning hours after delivery.

Merger with Cornell American [ edit ] In 1992, before the Review had backed down from its more controversial positions, a deliberately unsensational rival publication began printing called The Cornell American . It became the demesne of social conservatives until it ceased publishing in 1996.

In 2003 and 2004, successive editors began a controversial revamp of the Review , swinging it toward a more libertarian conservatism and a more neutral editorial position.  In response, former Review writer and activist Ryan Horn resurrected a new Cornell American to take up the social conservatism from which the Review had distanced itself.  The Cornell Review and the Cornell American had switched roles: the Review had become the calmer and lower profile paper, and the American the more traditional.

Rivalry between the Review and the American began to die down during the ensuing years as the staffs of the respective papers changed and the editorial positions of both papers began to converge. In April 2007, students from the Review and the American agreed to merge the two papers in the interest of preserving a conservative voice on campus. The Review assumed the American' s slogan: "Limited Government, Traditional Values, America First." It then reverted to the original Review slogan, "The Conservative Voice on Campus," until it changed to "We Do Not Apologize" in late 2014. The change was made due to the growing libertarian nature of the newspaper's staff and editorial stance.

21st century [ edit ] The Review was embroiled in several controversies in the 1990s. In 1993, its funding was threatened after it printed a cartoon critical of President Bill Clinton 's move to permit homosexuals in the U.S. military which was widely called homophobic .

[ citation needed ] In 1997, the Review printed an anonymous editorial lampooning the Oakland, California school district's move to teach in African-American English (AAE) . Entitled "So U Be Wantin' to Take Dis Class," it presented a mock catalogue of courses taught in a pastiche of AAE, for instance "Da white man be evil an he tryin' to keep da brotherman down. We's got Sharpton and Farrakhan so who da...man now, white boy." A student protest followed in which a number of copies of the Review were burned. The editors defended the editorial as satire and criticized the burning as suppression of free speech .

The Review historically prints pieces that bring great debate and controversy. In the autumn of 2002, Cornell Review Online published a column by Elliott Reed whose Good Vibrations piece exposed a coverup of vibrators to be sold at the campus health center.  Reed discovered an email to a listserv which claimed the health center had agreed to sell vibrators and solicited comments from female students.  The university claimed the email "jumped the gun", as no decision had been made at that time.  The Review was awarded a "Campus Outrage" nod from the conservative organization, Accuracy in Academia , for the piece.

[ citation needed ] The Review found itself in uncharted territory in 2008, with the election of 2008 and a national trend toward more liberal thinking. It marked the first time since 2001 that a Democratic president had been in office, but for the Review, the election of Barack Obama marked a greater shift on Cornell's campus. The Review conducted a poll in 2012 that found that 60% of Cornell students that were registered to vote would be voting for Obama, compared to 14% for Mitt Romney.

[ 3 ] Cornell Insider [ edit ] In December 2008, The Cornell Review started its blog, Cornell Insider . It is primarily focused on breaking campus events.

The Insider has been linked by blogs of all sizes, including IvyGate .

[ 4 ] Legal Insurrection , [ 5 ] Campus Reform , [ 6 ] The website also broke stories that were followed by media outlets, including The Hill , [ 7 ] RealClearPolitics [ 8 ] and The O'Reilly Factor .

[ 9 ] Management and operations [ edit ] The Review was incorporated in 1986 as The Ithaca Review, Inc. The editorial staff is headed by an undergraduate editor-in-chief, while the business staff is headed by an undergraduate president.

Funding for the Review comes primarily from the Collegiate Network , a syndicate of conservative campus newspapers funded by the Intercollegiate Studies Institute .

Notable alumni [ edit ] Ann Coulter , conservative social and political commentator Kenneth K. Lee , United States Circuit Judge Jamie Weinstein , host of The Dispatch Podcast, former senior editor of The Daily Caller , See also [ edit ] Conservatism portal Collegiate Network Cornell University The Cornell Daily Sun Footnotes [ edit ] ^ "Collegiate Network - About the CN - History" . Archived from the original on May 11, 2006 . Retrieved February 12, 2006 .

^ "Segregation argument not valid | the Cornell Daily Sun" . Archived from the original on September 28, 2011 . Retrieved December 23, 2008 .

^ "The Cornell Review" .

www.thecornellreview.com .

^ "Cornell Student Yawns in Class, Professor Loses His Mind > control freak, Cornell, crazy people, Mark Talbert, what hath god wrought | IvyGate" . Archived from the original on November 19, 2010.

^ "Cornell conservatives — not shocked, not somber" . November 7, 2012.

^ "Campus Reform the #1 Source for College News" .

^ "Frank on Afghanistan: More people 'need protection from criminals' than al Qaeda" . November 9, 2009.

^ "Frank: More People Need "Protection from Criminals" Than al-Qaeda | RealClearPolitics" .

^ "The O'Reilly Factor | Bill O'Reilly | Fox News" .

Fox News . Archived from the original on May 13, 2014 . Retrieved July 23, 2014 .

External links [ edit ] The Cornell Review Official Website post-2016 The Cornell Review Official Website pre-2016 Cornell American, Cornell Review Merge Hentoff, Nat .  " Setting Fire to Offensive Ideas ," The Village Voice , September 24, 1997 Ruby-Sachs, Emma and Waligore, Timothy. " A Once-Bright Star Dims ," The Nation , February 17, 2003.

The Cornell American: Taking a positive course To Do a New Review Cornell Review's Decline Chalkings Offend Ujamaa Residents v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category v t e Ivy League conservative student publications Brown Spectator Cornell Review Dartmouth Review Harvard Salient Princeton Tory The UPenn Statesman Yale Free Press Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Cornell_Review&oldid=1300590395 " Categories : 1984 establishments in New York (state) Newspapers established in 1984 Conservative magazines published in the United States Cornell University publications Libertarian publications Student newspapers published in New York (state) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2010 This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 06:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Cornell Review Add languages Add topic

