Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Usage 2 In the Georgics 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Tempus fugit 22 languages Български Brezhoneg Català Dansk Ελληνικά Español Euskara Français Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Македонски 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Latin phrase meaning "time flies" For other uses, see Tempus fugit (disambiguation) .

A winged hourglass representing time flying, designed for gravestones and monuments Tempus fugit ( Classical Latin pronunciation: [ˈt̪ɛmpʊs̠ ˈfʊɡit̪] ) is a Latin phrase, usually translated into English as " time flies ". The expression comes from line 284 of book 3 of Virgil 's Georgics , [ 1 ] where it appears as fugit irreparabile tempus : "it escapes, irretrievable time". The phrase is used in both its Latin and English forms as a proverb that "time's a-wasting".

Usage [ edit ] An example of the phrase as a sundial motto in Redu , Belgium.

Tempus fugit is typically employed as an admonition against sloth and procrastination (cf.

carpe diem ) rather than an argument for licentiousness (cf. " gather ye rosebuds while ye may "); the English form is often merely descriptive: "time flies like the wind", "time flies when you're having fun".

The phrase is a common motto , particularly on sundials and clocks.  It also has been used on gravestones .

Some writers have attempted rebuttals: "Time goes, you say? Ah, no! alas, time stays, we go."  by Henry Austin Dobson (1840–1921)."Hêd Amser! / Meddi Na! / Erys Amser / Dyn Â" on sundial at Univ of Bangor, North Wales. says the sundial was commissioned by Sir William Henry Preece, and offers an English equivalent: "Time flies, thou sayest – Nay!  Man flies; Time still doth stay." Another English version is: "Time Flies, Say Not So: Time Remains,'Tis Man Must Go." Bud Powell 's composition " Tempus Fugue-it " is a pun on the phrase.

In the Georgics [ edit ] The phrase's full appearance in Virgil's Georgics is: Original ( Virgil ) [ 1 ] Translation ( Dryden ) [ 2 ] Translation ( Rhoades ) [ 3 ] Omne adeo genus in terris hominum que ferarum que Thus every Creature , and of every Kind , The secret Joys of sweet Coition find : Not only Man's Imperial Race ; . . .

Nay, every race on earth of men, and beasts, et genus aequoreum , pecudes pictae que volucres , . . . but they That wing the liquid Air ; or swim the Sea , Or haunt the Desart , . . .

And ocean-folk, and flocks, and painted birds, in furias ignem que ruunt : amor omnibus idem . ...

. . . rush into the flame : For Love is Lord of all ; and is in all the same .

Rush to the raging fire: love sways them all.

Sed fugit interea , fugit inreparabile tempus , But time is lost , which never will renew , Fast flies meanwhile the irreparable hour, singula dum capti circumvectamur amore .

While we too far the pleasing Path pursue ; Surveying Nature , with too nice a view .

As point to point our charmed round we trace.

See also [ edit ] Time flies like an arrow; fruit flies like a banana Ars longa, vita brevis Carpe diem Got a Lot o' Livin' to Do!

, sung by Elvis Presley , in which "times a wasting" appears as a lyric.

Memento mori References [ edit ] ^ a b Vergilius Maro, Publius .

Georgicon , III . c. 29 BC. Hosted at Wikisource .

(in Latin) ^ Dryden, John (trans.).

The Works of Virgil: Containing His Pastorals, Georgics, and Æneis , 3rd ed., Vol. I, pp. 163–166 . Jacob Tonson (London), 1709. Hosted at Google Books. Accessed 30 May 2014.

^ Rhoades, James (trans.).

Bucolics, Aeneid, and Georgics of Vergil . Ginn & Co. (Boston), 1900. Hosted at MIT. Accessed 30 May 2014.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tempus fugit .

The dictionary definition of ' tempus fugit' at Wiktionary v t e Time Key concepts Past Present Future Eternity Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC Universal Time TAI Unit of time Orders of magnitude (time) Measurement systems Italian six-hour clock Thai six-hour clock 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Relative hour Daylight saving time Chinese Decimal Hexadecimal Hindu Metric Roman Sidereal Solar Time zone Calendars Main types Solar Lunar Lunisolar Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Solar Hijri Chinese Hindu Panchang Maya List Clocks Main types astronomical astrarium atomic quantum hourglass marine sundial watch 24-hour wristwatch mechanical stopwatch water-based Cuckoo clock Digital clock Grandfather clock History Timeline Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Philosophy of time A series and B series B-theory of time Chronocentrism Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Moving spotlight theory Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Religion Mythology Ages of Man Destiny Immortality Dreamtime Kāla Time and fate deities Father Time Wheel of time Kalachakra Human experience and use of time Chronemics Generation time Mental chronometry Music tempo time signature Rosy retrospection Tense–aspect–mood Time management Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow Time in science Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute space and time Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Instant Proper time Spacetime Theory of relativity Time domain Time translation symmetry Time reversal symmetry Other fields Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Clock reaction Glottochronology Time geography Related Leap year Memory Moment Six-hour day Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time immemorial Time travel Category Commons v t e Virgil Works Eclogues ( 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 ) Georgics Aeneid Appendix Vergiliana (spurious) Manuscripts Vergilius Augusteus Vergilius Romanus Vergilius Vaticanus Miscellaneous Christian interpretations of Eclogue 4 Sortes Vergilianae Virgilian progression Virgil's tomb Portrayals Dante and Virgil in Hell (1822 painting) Dante, led by Virgil, Consoles the Souls of the Envious (1835 painting) Francesca da Rimini and Paolo Malatesta Appraised by Dante and Virgil (1835 painting) Dante and Virgil (1850 painting) The Barque of Dante (1858 painting) The Death of Virgil (1945 novel) Commons Wikiquote Wikisource texts Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tempus_fugit&oldid=1252353184 " Categories : Latin mottos Latin words and phrases Time management Virgil Hidden categories: Articles with Latin-language sources (la) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with Classical Latin IPA Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 October 2024, at 23:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tempus fugit 22 languages Add topic

