Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Courses 3 Current faculty 4 Alumni and former faculty 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Faculty of Economics, University of Cambridge Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Constituent department of the University of Cambridge Faculty of Economics Affiliation University of Cambridge Chair of Faculty Oliver Linton Location Cambridge , United Kingdom Website http://www.econ.cam.ac.uk The Faculty of Economics at the University of Cambridge is composed of five research groups: macroeconomics , microeconomic theory , economic history , econometrics and empirical microeconomics. It is located in the Sidgwick Site in Cambridge .

History [ edit ] The Faculty of Economics at Cambridge has roots going back to the 1890s. Though frequently marked in the past by fervent internal academic debate, over theory, ontological approach and methodological orientation, the cumulative contribution of Cambridge economics to the development and evolution of the discipline nationally and internationally has been profound and unique.

It has repeatedly attracted international recognition and distinction by spawning some of the leading economics thinkers and paradigm changers of the times, including, for example, Alfred Marshall (one of the founders of Neoclassical economics), John Maynard Keynes (his general theory of employment, interest and money), Joan Robinson (capital theory), Richard Kahn (multiplier theory), James Meade (international economics), Nicholas Kaldor (increasing returns and economic growth), James Mirrlees (taxation), and Partha Dasgupta (poverty and environmental economics). During the 1970s, the ‘Cambridge School of Post-Keynesian Economics’ was a frequently used term to describe the distinctiveness of the research undertaken in the Faculty. The Faculty can boast several Nobel Prize winners over the past century. Many of its undergraduates have gone on to hold senior and prestigious academic posts elsewhere, both in the UK and overseas (including Harvard, Princeton and Stanford in the United States), and in some cases have themselves been Nobel Prize winners .

The Faculty has major teaching programmes at both undergraduate and postgraduate level and has one of largest group of research-active economists of any British university. It has around 80 resident or visiting academic staff and about 100 research students. Facilities include the Marshall Library in the Austin Robinson Economics building and the University Library nearby.

Courses [ edit ] Economics at Cambridge is ranked at number 1 in UK by the Complete University Guide , ranked 3rd by the Guardian and the University Times and ranked at number 5 in the world according to the Times Higher Education .

The Faculty offers one undergraduate and six postgraduate programmes of studies . The postgraduate courses include: an advanced diploma in economics, master of philosophy degrees (MPhil) in economics, economic research, economics & data science, finance and economics, and a PhD in economics.

Current faculty [ edit ] Giancarlo Corsetti ( Clare ) Sir Partha Dasgupta ( St. John's ) Sanjeev Goyal ( Christ's ) Tony Lawson ( Emmanuel ) Oliver Linton ( Trinity ) Murray Milgate ( Trinity / Queens' ) David Newbery ( Trinity ) M. Hashem Pesaran ( Trinity ) Robert Rowthorn ( King's ) Alumni and former faculty [ edit ] R. G. D. Allen (Sidney Sussex) Kenneth Arrow ( Churchill ) Andrew Bailey ( Queens' ) Rowland Baring, 3rd Earl of Cromer ( Trinity ) Peter Thomas Bauer ( Caius ) Charlie Bean ( Emmanuel ) David Bensusan-Butt ( King's ) Christopher Bliss ( King's ) D. G. Champernowne ( King's / Trinity ) Ha-Joon Chang ( Robinson ) Robert Chote ( Queens' ) Cameron Cobbold, 1st Baron Cobbold ( King's ) John James Cowperthwaite ( Christ's ) Walter Cunliffe, 1st Baron Cunliffe ( Trinity ) Angus Deaton ( Fitzwilliam ), Nobel Prize winner Gérard Debreu ( Churchill ), Nobel Prize winner Peter Diamond ( Churchill ), Nobel Prize winner Maurice Dobb ( Pembroke / Trinity ) John Eatwell, Baron Eatwell ( Queens' ) Robert Fogel ( Trinity ), Nobel Prize winner Milton Friedman ( Caius ), Nobel Prize winner John Kenneth Galbraith ( Trinity ) Pierangelo Garegnani ( Trinity ) Sir Edward George ( Emmanuel ) Anthony Giddens ( King's ) Claude Guillebaud ( St. John's ) Sir Gilbert Heathcote, 1st Baronet ( Christ's ) Oliver Hart ( King's / Churchill) , Nobel Prize winner Noreena Hertz ( King's ) John Hicks ( Caius ), Nobel Prize winner John C. Hull Richard Kahn ( King's ) John Maynard Keynes ( King's ) Mervyn King ( King's / St. John's ) Patrick Lynch ( Peterhouse ) Thomas Malthus ( Jesus ) Alfred Marshall ( St. John's ) Eric Maskin ( Darwin ) James Meade ( Trinity ), Nobel Prize winner James Mirrlees ( Trinity ), Nobel Prize winner Robert Neild ( Trinity ) William Nordhaus ( Clare Hall ), Nobel Prize winner Montagu Norman, 1st Baron Norman ( King's ) Douglass North ( Girton ), Nobel Prize winner Sheilagh Ogilvie ( Trinity ) Luigi Pasinetti ( King's ) Arthur Cecil Pigou ( King's ) Rogelio Ramírez de la O ( Fitzwilliam ) Frank P. Ramsey ( Magdalene / Trinity / King's ) Gordon Richardson ( Caius ) Dennis Robertson ( Trinity ) Austin Robinson (Sidney Sussex) Joan Robinson ( Girton / Newnham / King's ) Amartya Sen ( Trinity ), Nobel Prize winner and former Master of Trinity Gerald Shove ( King's ) Ajit Singh ( Queens' ) Piero Sraffa ( Trinity ) Joseph Stiglitz ( Caius / Fitzwilliam ), Nobel Prize winner Richard Stone ( Caius / King's ), Nobel Prize winner Adam Tooze ( King's ) Geoff Whitty ( St. John's ) Yuen Pau Woo Stefanie Stantcheva See also [ edit ] Marshall Library of Economics Listed buildings in Cambridge (west) References [ edit ] Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Faculty_of_Economics,_University_of_Cambridge&oldid=1282999820 " Categories : Economics departments in the United Kingdom Faculties in the School of the Humanities and Social Sciences, University of Cambridge Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles using infobox university This page was last edited on 29 March 2025, at 21:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Faculty of Economics, University of Cambridge Add languages Add topic

