Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Group aims and activity 2 Membership 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Ancients (art group) 4 languages العربية Català Polski Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Group of English artists who admired William Blake Early Morning , 1825, by Samuel Palmer Portrait of William Blake drawn by John Linnell (1820) The Ancients (also known as the Shoreham Ancients ) were a group of young English artists and others who were brought together around 1824 by their attraction to archaism in art and admiration for the work of William Blake (1757–1827), who was a generation or two older than the group. The core members of the Ancients were Samuel Palmer , George Richmond , and Edward Calvert . Except for Palmer, the central members who were artists were all students at the Royal Academy of Arts . They met in Blake's apartment, dubbed the "House of Interpreter" [ 1 ] and at the home of Samuel Palmer in the Kent village of Shoreham .  The Ancients made little impact on the English artistic scene during the ten years or so that the group continued, but several members were later significant artists, and interest in the group has gradually increased since the late 19th century.

They were the first English manifestation of the formalised artistic "brotherhood", an artistic movement whose aims included elements of communal living and promotion of a general vision for society. Continental groups of this sort included the German Nazarene movement and the Barbus in Paris, and the most successful later English example was to be the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood .  Like these groups they represented an oppositional break-away from the academic art establishment, and looked back to an idealized version of the past. They pursued equality among their members as a reaction to the hierarchical structure of the conventional art world.  Like Nazarenes and Barbus, they promoted the wearing of special revivalist costume, though only Palmer seems often to have worn it in practice; it seems to be shown in some portraits of Palmer by Richmond such as the bust-length miniature and chalk drawing (1829, both National Portrait Gallery ), which shows a round-necked pleated smock under a coat with a loose untidy collar and lapels, combined with somewhat Christ-like long hair and a beard.

[ 2 ] The Ancients were probably aware of the Nazarenes, but probably not of the Barbus.

[ 3 ] Group aims and activity [ edit ] George Richmond drawing of Samuel Palmer wearing "Ancient" clothing, 1830 Unlike Blake they were mostly High Tory in politics, but equally distrustful of the modern mercantile society booming around them, and looked back to an idealized ruralist past.  They never produced a manifesto, and their activities and relationships are poorly documented; Palmer's son later destroyed most of his father's papers from the period, hinting darkly that they contained sexual material showing "a mental condition ... full of danger, and neither sufficiently masculine nor sufficiently reticent".  Most of the information about the group's activities and dynamics comes from memoirs by them or their families and friends recalled several decades later.

[ 4 ] Their name may have come from John Giles, Palmer's stockbroker cousin, who despite being no artist was an important figure in the group and perhaps the initial instigator, as Palmer's son suggested.  He is recorded as very often extolling the superiority of "the ancients" in any context that occurred in conversation, though the word is also an important one for Blake.

[ 5 ] At this period "ancient" was a vaguer term than in modern English, often used to refer to the medieval or even Renaissance, as in the English legal term "Ancient Monument".

Christiana Payne, in the Grove Dictionary of Art , states, "Their subject-matter was drawn from the Bible, or from a vision of a golden age of pastoral innocence and abundance that had both Christian and Vergilian overtones." [ 6 ] The artist members submitted works for the Royal Academy exhibitions, many of which were exhibited, but these "stimulated no critical enthusiasm and were evidently not considered sufficiently threatening to provoke outrage, as the Pre-Raphaelites were to do a generation later".  None of the exhibited works seem to have been sold, and the group received very few commissions for works in "Ancient" style, though Richmond's successful career as a conventional portraitist took off in the early 1830s.

[ 7 ] Nor did the people of Shoreham seem to take objection to Palmer and his visitors, though he records they were known by some locals as the Extollagers , an attempt at " astrologers ".  Palmer added other local properties to his house there, which he rented out for the rest of his life.

[ 8 ] Both the Nazarene Brotherhood and the Barbus were able to attempt communal living in abandoned monasteries outside Rome and Paris respectively, but these convenient possibilities on the continent in the Napoleonic period were not available in the London of the 1820s, so Palmer encouraged long-term stays at his house in Shoreham or elsewhere in the village.  Most members had commitments of work or family in London that meant their visits were of weeks if not days, and only William Palmer and Welby Sherman seem to have stayed longer.

[ 9 ] Blake himself made the trip at least once.

[ 10 ] George Richmond self-portrait, 1830, gouache The artist John Linnell (1792—1882) was not a member of the group however he was close to most of the members.  Palmer's reference to Linnell's young daughters as "little ancients" in a letter to him of September 1824 is a key piece of evidence as to the date the group was formed (Palmer later married one of them, Hannah).

[ 11 ] Linnel was seven years older than Calvert, the oldest in the group, and a strong-minded person who disagreed with many of the group's positions.  In a letter to Palmer years later he wrote that "I ought to remember that I was not one of the monthly-meeting elite — when at the Platonic feast of reason and soul only real Greeks from Hackney and Lisson Grove were admitted".

[ 12 ] Linnell was probably mainly responsible for introducing Palmer and the others to northern European art of the 15th and 16th centuries, which was then relatively little-known in England.  He knew Charles (Karl) Aders, a German businessman living in London who had an important collection of early Northern paintings, including a copy of the Ghent Altarpiece , which Linnell enabled the group to visit.

[ 13 ] In 1832 Palmer received a further legacy, with which he bought a cottage in St John's Wood in London, and thereafter he gradually spent more time in London. The monthly dinners to which Linnell's letter refers were usually held there.  Palmer and Richmond with their wives left together for an extended visit to Italy in 1837, which may be taken as the final end of the group, though most members continued as friends long afterwards.

[ 14 ] The exposure in Italy to art in the classical tradition influenced both artists to move away from Ancient primitivism.  The proximity of Shoreham to the Captain Swing campaign of insurgency among rural labourers in 1830, which Palmer violently opposed, may have disillusioned him as to the peace and harmony of rural life.

[ 15 ] Richmond wrote in a letter to Palmer in later life "We all wanted thrashing when in a dream of sentiment we thought we were learning art".

[ 16 ] Membership [ edit ] Edward Calvert , The Ploughman , wood engraving of 1827, 94 mm (3.7 in) by 140 mm (5.51 in) If there was ever any formal list of members, it has not survived, but the main figures, recruited roughly between 1824 and 1827, were: [ 17 ] Artists Edward Calvert (1799–1883); Frederick Tatham (1805–1878); Samuel Palmer (1805–1881); George Richmond (1809–1896), the portrait painter; Francis Oliver Finch (1802–1862); [ 18 ] Henry Walter (c. 1786 – 1849); Welby Sherman ; Others John Giles, a stockbroker , cousin and "constant supporter" of Palmer.

[ 19 ] Arthur Tatham (1808–1874), for over forty years rector of Broadoak and Boconoc, Cornwall, and prebendary of Exeter Cathedral , brother of Frederick Tatham.

Also associated Julia Tatham (1811–1881), Frederick Tatham 's sister, who married George Richmond ; Notes [ edit ] ^ Timothy Wilcox, Samuel Palmer (London: Tate, 2005), 18.

^ Vaughan, 17–20, 105–106, 129; see also drawings at Yale on Wikimedia Commons ^ Vaughan, 18–19 argues they must have known of the Nazarenes; though Paley, 99–100, is not so sure.

^ Vaughan, 18–21, 20 quoted ^ Paley, 98–99; Vaughan, 18, 105 ^ Oxford Art Online, Subscription only: http://www.oxfordartonline.com/subscriber/article/grove/art/T002673 ^ Vaughan, 20–21, 20 quoted ^ Vaughan, 19–20 ^ Vaughan, 19, 105–106 ^ Paley, 105 ^ Vaughan, 18 ^ Paley, 103 ^ Vaughan, 18–19, 101–102; Paley, 103–104. Aders' collection was sold in London in 1835; he and his wife were also friends with Samuel Taylor Coleridge .

^ Paley, 108–112 ^ Paley, 106–108 ^ Paley, 118 ^ Vaughan, 105 ^ Palmer, Samuel (1880). "Francis Oliver Finch, In Memoriam". In Gilchrist, A (ed.).

Life of William Blake . Vol. 2 (2 ed.). London: Macmillan.

Printed as a Note in First Edition, Vol. I. p. 298.

^ Vaughan, 105 References [ edit ] Paley, Morton D. (Winter 1989). "The Art of "The Ancients" ".

Huntington Library Quarterly .

52 (1). University of California Press: 97– 124.

doi : 10.2307/3817553 .

JSTOR 3817553 .

Vaughan, William, et al., Samuel Palmer, Vision and Landscape , 2005, British Museum Press, ISBN 9780714126418 Wilcox, Timothy.

Samuel Palmer . London: Tate, 2005.

v t e William Blake Literary works Early writings Poetical Sketches An Island in the Moon All Religions are One There is No Natural Religion Songs of Innocence and of Experience Songs of Innocence The Shepherd The Ecchoing Green The Lamb The Little Black Boy The Blossom The Chimney Sweeper The Little Boy Lost The Little Boy Found Laughing Song A Cradle Song The Divine Image Holy Thursday Night Spring Nurse's Song Infant Joy A Dream On Another's Sorrow Songs of Experience Introduction Earth's Answer The Clod and the Pebble Holy Thursday The Little Girl Lost The Little Girl Found The Chimney Sweeper Nurse's Song The Sick Rose The Fly The Angel The Tyger My Pretty Rose Tree Ah! Sun-flower The Lilly The Garden of Love The Little Vagabond London The Human Abstract Infant Sorrow A Poison Tree A Little Boy Lost A Little Girl Lost To Tirzah The School Boy The Voice of the Ancient Bard A Divine Image (found only in Copy BB) Prophetic books The continental prophecies America a Prophecy Europe a Prophecy The Song of Los Other Tiriel The Book of Thel The Marriage of Heaven and Hell The French Revolution Visions of the Daughters of Albion The Book of Urizen The Book of Ahania The Book of Los The Four Zoas Milton Jerusalem: The Emanation of the Giant Albion The Pickering Manuscript " Auguries of Innocence " " The Mental Traveller " The Rossetti Manuscript " Never pain to tell thy love " Mythology Ahania Albion Beulah Bromion Enion Enitharmon Fuzon Golgonooza Grodna Har Leutha Los Luvah Orc Palamabron Spectre Tharmas Thiriel Tiriel Urizen Urthona Utha Vala Art Paintings and prints Relief etching Engravings for Original Stories from Real Life The Ancient of Days Europe Supported by Africa and America The Night of Enitharmon's Joy Newton Nebuchadnezzar Illustrations for Night-Thoughts Illustrations of The Grave The Four and Twenty Elders Casting their Crowns before the Divine Throne Illustrations of Paradise Lost A Vision of the Last Judgement Descriptive Catalogue The Great Red Dragon paintings Pity The Ghost of a Flea Agony in the Garden Illustrations of On the Morning of Christ's Nativity The Wood of the Self-Murderers: The Harpies and the Suicides Illustrations of the Book of Job Sketches Visionary Heads Scholarship, in popular culture, and more Scholarly works Life of William Blake The Works of William Blake: Poetic, Symbolic and Critical Fearful Symmetry Blake: Prophet Against Empire Witness Against the Beast Musical Serenade for Tenor, Horn and Strings (1943) Ten Blake Songs (1958) Songs and Proverbs of William Blake (1965) The Lamb (1982) Themes from William Blake's The Marriage of Heaven and Hell (1998) Related William Blake in popular culture William Blake Archive Blake (1983 monologue) In Lambeth (1989 play) Catherine Blake (wife) Ancients v t e Romanticism Countries Denmark England (literature) France (literature) Germany Japan Norway Poland Russia (literature) Scotland Spain (literature) Sweden (literature) Movements Ancients Bohemianism Coppet group Counter-Enlightenment Dark Düsseldorf School German historical school Gothic revival Hudson River School Indianism Jena Lake Poets Nationalist Nazarene movement Neo Pre Sturm und Drang Post Purismo Transcendentalism Ukrainian school Ultra Wallenrodism Themes Blue flower British Marine Gesamtkunstwerk Gothic fiction Hero Byronic Romantic Historical fiction Mal du siècle Medievalism Noble savage Nostalgia Ossian Pantheism Rhine Romantic genius Wanderlust Weltschmerz White Mountain art Writers Brazil Abreu Alencar Manuel Antônio de Almeida Alves Assis Azevedo Barreto Dias Guimarães Macedo Magalhães Reis Taunay Varela France Baudelaire Bertrand Chateaubriand Dumas Gautier Hugo Lamartine Mérimée Musset Nerval Nodier Staël Vigny Germany A. v. Arnim B. v. Arnim Beer Brentano Eichendorff Fouqué Goethe Brothers Grimm Günderrode Gutzkow Hauff Heine Hoffmann Hölderlin Jean Paul Kleist Mörike Novalis Schwab Tieck Uhland Great Britain Barbauld Blake Anne Brontë C. Brontë E. Brontë Burns Byron Carlyle Clare Coleridge de Quincey Maria Edgeworth Keats Maturin Polidori Radcliffe Mary Robinson Scott Seward M. Shelley P. B. Shelley Southey Wordsworth Poland Fredro Krasiński Józef Ignacy Kraszewski Malczewski Mickiewicz Norwid Potocki Wincenty Pol Słowacki Portugal Castelo Branco Castilho João de Deus Dinis Garrett Herculano Soares dos Passos Romania Mihail Kogălniceanu Constantin Negruzzi Vasile Alecsandri Dimitrie Bolintineanu Mihai Eminescu George Coșbuc Octavian Goga Alexandru Macedonski Barbu Ștefănescu Delavrancea Russia Baratynsky Batyushkov Gogol Karamzin Küchelbecker Lermontov Pushkin Tyutchev Vyazemsky Zhukovsky Serbia Jakšić Kostić Njegoš Radičević Stojadinović-Srpkinja Zmaj Spain Bécquer Rosalía de Castro Espronceda Gutiérrez Saavedra Zorrilla U.S.

Bryant Cooper Emerson Hawthorne Josiah Gilbert Holland Irving Longfellow Lowell Poe Other Abovian Alfieri Andersen Baratashvili Botev Chavchavadze Foscolo Frashëri Geijer Grundtvig Heliade Isaacs Lenau Leopardi Mácha Manzoni Maturin Oehlenschläger Orbeliani Prešeren Raffi Runeberg Shevchenko Topelius Vörösmarty Wergeland Musicians Austria Bruckner Czerny Hummel Mahler Schubert Thalberg Wolf Czechia Dvořák Moscheles Reicha Smetana Voříšek France Adam Alkan Auber Berlioz Fauré Halévy Méhul Onslow Saint-Saëns Germany Beethoven Brahms Bruch Kalkbrenner Loewe Marschner Fanny Mendelssohn Felix Mendelssohn Meyerbeer Moszkowski C. Schumann R. Schumann Spohr Strauss Wagner Weber Great Britain Elgar Holst Vaughan Williams Hungary Erkel Goldmark Heller Hubay Joachim Liszt Italy Bellini Busoni Cherubini Donizetti Paganini Respighi Rossini Spontini Verdi Poland Bortkiewicz Chopin Lipiński Moniuszko Paderewski Stolpe Tausig Wieniawski Russia Arensky Balakirev Borodin Cui Glinka Lyapunov Medtner Mussorgsky Rachmaninoff Rimsky-Korsakov Rubinstein Scriabin Tchaikovsky Serbia Hristić Konjović Mokranjac Stanković U.S.

Chadwick Beach Foote Foster Joplin MacDowell Sousa Other Bennett Berwald Field Franck Grieg Sibelius Sor Philosophers Belinsky Berchet Burke Carlyle Chaadayev Coleridge Constant Emerson Fichte Goethe Hazlitt Hegel Khomyakov Lamennais Larra Maistre Mazzini Michelet Müller Novalis Quinet Rousseau Schelling Schiller A. Schlegel F. Schlegel Schleiermacher Senancour Snellman Staël Thoreau Tieck Wackenroder Visual artists Aivazovsky Bierstadt Blake Bonington Bryullov Chassériau Church Constable Cole Corot Dahl David d'Angers Delacroix Edelfelt Friedrich Fuseli Gallen-Kallela Géricault Girodet Głowacki Goya Gude Hayez Janmot Jones Kiprensky Koch Lampi Leutze Martin Michałowski Palmer Porto-Alegre Préault Révoil Richard Rude Runge Saleh Scheffer Stattler Stroy Tidemand Tropinin Turner Veit Ward Wiertz Scholars Abraham Abrams Barzun Beiser Berlin Blanning Bloom Blume Dahlhaus Ferber Frye Janion Lacoue-Labarthe Lovejoy de Man Nancy Porthan Ricks Rosen Wellek Related topics Coleridge's theory of life German idealism List of romantics List of Romantic poets Middle Ages in history Opium and Romanticism Romantic ballet Romantic epistemology Romantic medicine Romantic poetry Romantic psychology Romanticism and economics Romanticism and the French Revolution Romanticism in science Bacon Evolution theory Wanderer above the Sea of Fog ← Age of Enlightenment Modernism → Category Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ancients_(art_group)&oldid=1297811796 " Categories : English artist groups and collectives 19th-century art groups English art Romantic art movements Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 17:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ancients (art group) 4 languages Add topic

