Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Botany 2 Zoology 3 In other taxonomic groups 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Theca 9 languages Bosanski Català Deutsch Español Euskara Italiano Polski Português Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sheath or covering This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Theca" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Strawberry anther with parallel thecae In biology , a theca ( pl.

: thecae ) is a sheath or a covering.

Botany [ edit ] In botany , the theca is related to plant's flower anatomy. The theca of an angiosperm consists of a pair of microsporangia that are adjacent to each other and share a common area of dehiscence called the stomium .

[ 1 ] Any part of a microsporophyll that bears microsporangia is called an anther . Most anthers are formed on the apex of a filament . An anther and its filament together form a typical (or filantherous) stamen , part of the male floral organ.

The typical anther is bilocular, i.e. it consists of two thecae. Each theca contains two microsporangia, also known as pollen sacs. The microsporangia produce the microspores , which for seed plants are known as pollen grains.

If the pollen sacs are not adjacent, or if they open separately, then no thecae are formed. In Lauraceae, for example, the pollen sacs are spaced apart and open independently.

The tissue between the locules and the cells is called the connective and the parenchyma . Both pollen sacs are separated by the stomium . When the anther is dehiscing, it opens at the stomium.

The outer cells of the theca form the epidermis . Below the epidermis, the somatic cells form the tapetum . These support the development of microspores into mature pollen grains. However, little is known about the underlying genetic mechanisms, which play a role in male sporo- and gametogenesis.

Divergent thecae in Graderia The thecal arrangement of a typical stamen can be as follows: Divergent: both thecae in line, and forming an acute angle with the filament Transverse (or explanate): both thecae exactly in line, at right angles with the filament Oblique: the thecae fixed to each other in an oblique way Parallel: the thecae fixed to each other in a parallel way Zoology [ edit ] In biology , the theca of follicle can also refer to the site of androgen production in females. The theca of the spinal cord is called the thecal sac , and intrathecal injections are made there or in the subarachnoid space of the skull .

In human embryogenesis , the theca cells form a corpus luteum after a Graafian follicle has expelled its secondary oocyte arrested in second meiosis .

Thecal shape is also important in graptolite and pterobranch taxonomy.

In dinoflagellates that are armoured their covering is made up of thecal plates .

In other taxonomic groups [ edit ] In microbiology and planktology , a theca is a subcellular structural component out of which the frustules of diatoms and dinoflagellates are constructed.

See also [ edit ] Intrathecal Thecal sac References [ edit ] ^ Larry Hufford , "The origin and early evolution of angiosperm stamens" in The Anther: form, function, and phylogeny , William G. D'Arcy and Richard C. Keating (editors), Cambridge University Press , 1996, 351pp, p.60, ISBN 978-0-521-48063-5 (from Google Books ) v t e Microbiology : Protistology : Protists Former classifications Protozoa Mastigophora/Flagellates Sarcodina/Amoeboids Testate Heliozoa Infusoria / Ciliates Sporozoa Algae Cryptogams Thallophytes Fungus-like organisms Slime molds Ambiregnal protists Morphology Archaeplastida Viridiplantae " Green algae ": Phycoplast Phragmoplast Flagellar apparatus Glaucophytes : Cyanelles Phycobilisomes Red algae : Pit connection Phycobilisomes Hacrobia Cryptophyta : Mastigoneme Periplast Haptophytes : Coccolith Haptonema Stramenopiles General: Mastigoneme Diatoms : Frustule Brown algae : Lamina Pneumatocyst Alveolata General: Alveoli Trichocyst Dinoflagellates : Dinokaryon Dinocyst Theca Ciliates : Cilium Cirrus Macronucleus Micronucleus Apicomplexans : Rhoptry Apicoplast Microneme Rhizaria Phytomyxea Cruciform division " Excavata " Kinetoplastids : Kinetoplast Glycosome Euglenida : Periplast/pellicle Amoebozoa Dictyostelids : Macrocyst Sorocarp Opisthokonta Choanoflagellates : Collar of microvilli General Levels of organization Unicellular Monadoid Amoeboid Coccoid Amoeboflagellate Colonial s.s.

Colonial flagellated Tetrasporal/capsal/palmelloid Sarcinoid Coenobial Filamentous/trichal/ hyphal Parenchymatous Pseudoparenchymatous /plektenchymatic Membranous/thalloid/foliaceous Multinucleated Syncytial Coenocytic Siphonous Siphonocladous Multicellular s.s.

/ tissular /histonal Cell surface structures Simple cell membrane Mucilage Scale Frustule Cell wall Lorica Skeleton Test Theca Periplast/pellicle Locomotion Flagellum Cilium Pseudopodia Gliding motility Mitochondria Hydrogenosome Mitosome Nucleus Nucleomorph Multinucleate cells Plasmodium Dikaryon Heterokaryon Mitosis in protists Open Closed Orthomitosis Pleuromitosis Meiosis in protists Gametic Zygotic Sporic Other Cyst Cytostome Fimbriae Extrusome Contractile vacuole Eyespot apparatus Pyrenoid Axostyle Mastigont system Ecology and physiology Microbial ecology Microbial biogeography Baas-Becking hypothesis Development / Reproduction Life cycles Fertilization Nutrition: Autotrophy Phototrophy Heterotrophy Phagotrophy Osmotrophy Saprotrophy Parasitism Biotrophy Necrotrophy Mixotrophy Auxotrophy This plant physiology article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theca&oldid=1241794906 " Categories : Developmental biology Plant anatomy Plant physiology Pollination Animal anatomy Diatom biology Dinoflagellate biology Plant physiology stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2009 All articles needing additional references All stub articles This page was last edited on 23 August 2024, at 05:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Theca 9 languages Add topic

