Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Types of photographs 4 Preservation Toggle Preservation subsection 4.1 Paper folders 4.2 Polyester enclosures 4.3 Handling and care 5 Myths and beliefs 6 Legality 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Photograph 52 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bikol Central Български Català ChiShona Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Qırımtatarca Runa Simi Sicilianu සිංහල کوردی Sunda Suomi தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Image created by light falling on a light-sensitive surface For other uses, see Photograph (disambiguation) .

The earliest known surviving product of Joseph Nicéphore Niépce 's heliography process, 1825. It is an ink on paper print and reproduces a 17th-century Flemish engraving showing a man leading a horse.

View from the Window at Le Gras (1826 or 1827), by Joseph Nicéphore Niépce , the earliest known surviving photograph of a real-world scene, made with a camera obscura . Original (left) and colorized reoriented enhancement (right).

A modern-day photograph of an Icelandic landscape, captured on a personal camera A photograph (also known as a photo , or more generically referred to as an image or picture ) is an image created by light falling on a photosensitive surface, usually photographic film or an electronic image sensor . The process and practice of creating such images is called photography .

Most photographs are now created using a smartphone or camera , which uses a lens to focus the scene's visible wavelengths of light into a reproduction of what the human eye would perceive.

Etymology [ edit ] The word photograph was coined in 1839 by Sir John Herschel and is based on the Greek φῶς ( phos ), meaning "light," and γραφή ( graphê ), meaning "drawing, writing," together meaning "drawing with light." [ 1 ] History [ edit ] Main article: History of photography The first permanent photograph, a contact-exposed copy of an engraving, was made in 1822 using the bitumen -based " heliography " process developed by Joseph Nicéphore Niépce . The first photographs of a real-world scene, made using a camera obscura , followed a few years later at Le Gras, France, in 1826, but Niépce's process was not sensitive enough to be practical for that application: a camera exposure lasting for hours or days was required.

[ 2 ] In 1829, Niépce entered into a partnership with Louis Daguerre , and the two collaborated to work out a similar, but more sensitive, and otherwise improved process.

View from the Window at Le Gras , 1826 by Joseph Nicéphore Niépce After Niépce's death on the 5th July 1833 [ 3 ] , Daguerre concentrated on silver halide -based alternatives. He exposed a silver-plated copper sheet to iodine vapor, creating a layer of light-sensitive silver iodide ; exposed it in the camera for a few minutes; developed the resulting invisible latent image to visibility with mercury fumes; then bathed the plate in a hot salt solution to remove the remaining silver iodide, making the results light-fast. He named this first practical process for making photographs with a camera, the daguerreotype , after himself. Its existence was announced to the world on 7 January 1839, but working details were not made public until 19 August that year. Other inventors soon made drastic improvements that reduced the required amount of exposure time from a few minutes to just a few seconds, making portrait photography truly practical and widely popular during this time.

The daguerreotype had shortcomings, notably the fragility of the mirror-like image surface and the particular viewing conditions required to see the image properly. Each was a unique, opaque positive that could only be duplicated by copying it with a camera. Inventors set about working out improved processes that would be more practical. By the end of the 1850s, the daguerreotype had been replaced by the less expensive and more easily viewed ambrotype and tintype , which made use of the recently introduced collodion process . Glass plate collodion negatives used to make prints on albumen paper soon became the preferred photographic method and held that position for many years, even after the introduction of the more convenient gelatin process in 1871. Refinements of the gelatin process have remained the primary black-and-white photographic process to this day, differing primarily in the sensitivity of the emulsion and the support material used, which was originally glass, then a variety of flexible plastic films , along with various types of paper for the final prints.

The Market Square of Helsinki , in the 1890s Color photography is almost as old as black-and-white , with early experiments including John Herschel 's Anthotype prints in 1842, the pioneering work of Louis Ducos du Hauron in the 1860s, and the Lippmann process unveiled in 1891, but for many years color photography remained little more than a laboratory curiosity. It first became a widespread commercial reality with the introduction of Autochrome plates in 1907, but the plates were very expensive and not suitable for casual snapshot-taking with hand-held cameras. The mid-1930s saw the introduction of Kodachrome and Agfacolor Neu , the first easy-to-use color films of the modern multi-layer chromogenic type. These early processes produced transparencies for use in slide projectors and viewing devices, but color prints became increasingly popular after the introduction of chromogenic color print paper in the 1940s. The needs of the motion picture industry generated a number of special processes and systems, perhaps the best-known being the now-obsolete three-strip Technicolor process.

Types of photographs [ edit ] Long-exposure photograph of the Very Large Telescope [ 4 ] Non-digital photographs are produced with a two-step chemical process. In the two-step process, the light-sensitive film captures a negative image (colors and lights/darks are inverted). To produce a positive image, the negative is most commonly transferred (' printed ') onto photographic paper . Printing the negative onto transparent film stock is used to manufacture motion picture films.

Alternatively, the film is processed to invert the negative image, yielding positive transparency . Such positive images are usually mounted in frames, called slides. Before recent advances in digital photography, transparencies were widely used by professionals because of their sharpness and accuracy of color rendition. Most photographs published in magazines were taken on color transparency film.

Originally, all photographs were monochromatic or hand-painted in color. Although methods for developing color photos were available as early as 1861, they did not become widely available until the 1940s or 1950s, and even so, until the 1960s, most photographs were taken in black and white. Since then, color photography has dominated popular photography, although black-and-white is still used, being easier to develop than color.

Panoramic format images can be taken with cameras like the Hasselblad Xpan on standard film. Since the 1990s, panoramic photos have been available on the Advanced Photo System (APS) film. APS was developed by several of the major film manufacturers to provide a film with different formats and computerized options available, though APS panoramas were created using a mask in panorama-capable cameras, far less desirable than a true panoramic camera, which achieves its effect through a wider film format. APS has become less popular and has been discontinued.

The advent of the microcomputer and digital photography has led to the rise of digital prints . These prints are created from stored graphic formats such as JPEG , TIFF , and RAW . The types of printers used include inkjet printers , dye-sublimation printers , laser printers , and thermal printers . Inkjet prints are sometimes given the coined name " Giclée ".

The Web has been a popular medium for storing and sharing photos ever since the first photograph was published on the web by Tim Berners-Lee in 1992 (an image of the CERN house band Les Horribles Cernettes ). Today, popular sites such as Flickr , PhotoBucket , and 500px are used by millions of people to share their pictures.

The first "selfie", or self-portrait, was taken by Robert Cornelious back in 1839.

[ 5 ] "Selfies" have become one of the most common photographs, especially among female young adults. Social media has become such a cultural advancement because of photography. People thrive off of the selfies of their favorite celebrities, many receive millions of likes on social media because of one simple selfie.

Preservation [ edit ] Paper folders [ edit ] Ideal photograph storage involves placing each photo in an individual folder constructed from buffered, or acid-free paper .

[ 6 ] Buffered paper folders are especially recommended in cases when a photograph was previously mounted onto poor quality material or using an adhesive that will lead to even more acid creation.

[ 7 ] Store photographs measuring 8x10 inches or smaller vertically along the longer edge of the photo in the buffered paper folder, within a larger archival box, and label each folder with relevant information to identify it. The rigid nature of the folder protects the photo from slumping or creasing, as long as the box is not packed too tightly or under filled. Folder larger photos or brittle photos stacked flat within archival boxes with other materials of comparable size.

[ 8 ] Polyester enclosures [ edit ] The most stable of plastics used in photo preservation, polyester , does not generate any harmful chemical elements, nor does it have any capability to absorb acids generated by the photograph itself. Polyester sleeves and encapsulation have been praised for their ability to protect the photograph from humidity and environmental pollution , slowing the reaction between the item and the atmosphere. This is true, however the polyester just as frequently traps these elements next to the material it is intended to protect. This is especially risky in a storage environment that experiences drastic fluctuations in humidity or temperature, leading to ferrotyping, or sticking of the photograph to the plastic.

[ 6 ] Photographs sleeved or encapsulated in polyester cannot be stored vertically in boxes because they will slide down next to each other within the box, bending and folding, nor can the archivist write directly onto the polyester to identify the photograph. Therefore, it is necessary to either stack polyester protected photographs horizontally within a box, or bind them in a three ring binder.  Stacking the photos horizontally within a flat box will greatly reduce ease of access, and binders leave three sides of the photo exposed to the effects of light [ 9 ] and do not support the photograph evenly on both sides, leading to slumping and bending within the binder. The plastic used for enclosures has been manufactured to be as frictionless as possible to prevent scratching photos during insertion to the sleeves. Unfortunately, the slippery nature of the enclosure generates a build-up of static electricity , which attracts dust and lint particles. The static can attract the dust to the inside of the sleeve, as well, where it can scratch the photograph.

[ 6 ] Likewise, these components that aid in insertion of the photo, referred to as slip agents, can break down and transfer from the plastic to the photograph, where they deposit as an oily film, attracting further lint and dust. At this time, there is no test to evaluate the long-term effects of these components on photographs. In addition, the plastic sleeves can develop kinks or creases in the surface, which will scratch away at the emulsion during handling.

[ 9 ] Handling and care [ edit ] It is best to leave photographs lying flat on the table when viewing them. Do not pick it up from a corner, or even from two sides and hold it at eye level. Every time the photograph bends, even a little, this can break down the emulsion .

[ 10 ] The very nature of enclosing a photograph in plastic encourages users to pick it up; users tend to handle plastic enclosed photographs less gently than non-enclosed photographs, simply because they feel the plastic enclosure makes the photo impervious to all mishandling. As long as a photo is in its folder, there is no need to touch it; simply remove the folder from the box, lay it flat on the table, and open the folder. If for some reason the researchers or archivists do need to handle the actual photo, perhaps to examine the verso for writing, they can use gloves if there appears to be a risk from oils or dirt on the hands.

Myths and beliefs [ edit ] See also: Aniconism Because daguerreotypes were rendered on a mirrored surface, many spiritualists also became practitioners of the new art form.  Spiritualists would claim that the human image on the mirrored surface was akin to looking into one's soul. The spiritualists also believed that it would open their souls and let demons in. Among some Muslims, it is makruh (disliked) to perform salah (worship) in a place decorated with photographs.

[ 11 ] Photography and darkroom anomalies and artifacts sometimes lead viewers to believe that spirits or demons have been captured in photos. Some have made a career out of taking pictures of "ghosts" or "spirits".

[ 12 ] There are many instances where people believe photos will bring bad luck either to the person taking the picture or people captured in the photo. For instance, a photograph taken of a pregnant woman will bring bad luck to the baby in the womb and photos taken of dead people will ensure that person is not successful in the afterlife.

[ 13 ] Legality [ edit ] Main article: Photography and the law The production or distribution of certain types of photograph has been forbidden under modern laws, such as those of government buildings, [ 14 ] highly classified regions, [ 15 ] private property, copyrighted works, [ 16 ] [ 17 ] children's genitalia , [ 18 ] child pornography and less commonly pornography overall.

[ 19 ] These laws vary greatly between jurisdictions.

In some public property owned by government, such as law courts, [ 20 ] government buildings, libraries, civic centres [ 21 ] [ 22 ] and some of the museums in Hong Kong, photography is not allowed without permission from the government. It is illegal to equip or take photographs and recording in a place of public entertainment, such as cinemas and indoor theaters.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] In Hungary, from 15 March 2014 when the long-awaited Civil Code was published, the law re-stated what had been normal practice, namely, that a person had the right to refuse being photographed. However, implied consent exists: it is not illegal to photograph a person who does not actively object.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] In South Africa photographing people in public is legal.

[ 27 ] Reproducing and selling photographs of people is legal for editorial and limited fair use commercial purposes. There exists no case law to define what the limits on commercial use are. In the United Kingdom there are no laws forbidding photography of private property from a public place.

[ 28 ] Persistent and aggressive photography of a single individual may come under the legal definition of harassment .

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] A right to privacy came into existence in UK law as a consequence of the incorporation of the European Convention on Human Rights into domestic law through the Human Rights Act 1998 . This can result in restrictions on the publication of photography.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] See also [ edit ] Aerial photography Archival science Cinematographer Conservation and restoration of photographs Hand-colouring of photographs List of largest photographs List of most expensive photographs List of photographs considered the most important Photogram Pseudo-photograph Slide show References [ edit ] ^ "Online Etymology Dictionary" .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2017 . Retrieved 16 January 2017 .

^ "The First Photograph - Heliography" . Archived from the original on 6 October 2009 . Retrieved 29 September 2009 .

from Helmut Gernsheim's article, "The 150th Anniversary of Photography," in History of Photography Vol. I, No. 1, January 1977: ... In 1822, Niépce coated a glass plate ... The sunlight passing through ... This first permanent example ... was destroyed ... some years later.

^ "Joseph Nicéphore Niepce" .

Nature .

132 (21). 1 July 1933.

doi : 10.1038/132021b0 .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

^ "A Stream of Stars over Paranal" .

ESO Picture of the Week .

Archived from the original on 20 January 2021 . Retrieved 27 May 2014 .

^ Contrastly (12 December 2015).

"The Evolution of Photography" .

Contrastly . Retrieved 5 April 2024 .

^ a b c "5.6 Storage Enclosures for Photographic Materials" .

Archived from the original on 17 September 2021 . Retrieved 16 January 2017 .

^ Norris, Debbie Hess. "Caring for Your Photographic Collections." Library of Congress. 9 Feb. 2008, LOC.gov Archived 13 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ "How Should I Store my Photographic Prints?" Preservation and Archives Professionals. The National Archives and Records Administration. 9 February 2008, Archives.gov Archived 13 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b International Organization for Standardization. ISO 18902:2001(E).

Geneva, Switzerland : ISO Office, 2007.

^ Baggett, James L. "Handle with Care: Photos." Alabama Librarian.
54.1 (2004): 5.

^ Rizvi, Sayyid.

Your Questions Answered . p. 32.

^ "Photos That AREN'T Paranormal" .

thoughtco.com .

Archived from the original on 17 April 2019 . Retrieved 7 May 2018 .

^ Chevelle, Chelle (7 August 2023).

"Superstitions About Photography" .

Medium . Retrieved 5 April 2024 .

^ "Hong Kong e-Legislation" .

Government of Hong Kong .

Archived from the original on 10 October 2016 . Retrieved 20 September 2017 .

^ Masco, Joseph. ""Sensitive but Unclassified": Secrecy and the Counterterrorist State." Public Culture 22.3 (2010): 433–463.

^ Deazley, Ronan (2010). "Photography, copyright, and the South Kensington experiment".

Intellectual Property Quarterly .

3 : 293– 311.

^ Turnbull, Bruce H. "Important legal developments regarding protection of copyrighted content against unauthorized copying." IEEE Communications Magazine 39.8 (2001): 92–100.

^ Slane, Andrea. "From scanning to sexting: The scope of protection of dignity-based privacy in Canadian child pornography law." Osgoode Hall Law Journal 48 (2010): 543.

^ Taylor, Max; Quayle, Ethel; Holland, Gemma (2001). "Child pornography, the Internet and offending".

ISUMA - the Canadian Journal of Policy Research .

2 (2): 94– 100.

^ "Hong Kong e-Legislation" .

www.legislation.gov.hk .

Archived from the original on 10 October 2016 . Retrieved 20 September 2017 .

^ "Civic Centres Regulation" Government of Hong Kong ^ "Civic Centres Regulation Filming" Government of Hong Kong ^ "Prevention Of Copyright Piracy Ordinance" Archived 2016-10-09 at the Wayback Machine Government of Hong Kong ^ [1] Archived 2016-10-09 at the Wayback Machine Government of Hong Kong ^ "Xpat Opinion: What's Up With The New Civil Code & Press Photographs? - Xpatloop.com - Expat Life In Budapest, Hungary - Current affairs" .

www.xpatloop.com .

Archived from the original on 21 September 2017 . Retrieved 20 September 2017 .

^ Nolan, Daniel (14 March 2014).

"Hungary law requires photographers to ask permission to take pictures" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 10 April 2014 . Retrieved 20 May 2014 .

^ Burchell, Jonathan (2009).

"The Legal Protection of Privacy in South Africa: A Transplantable Hybrid" (PDF) .

Electronic Journal of Comparative Law .

13 (1).

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 December 2013 . Retrieved 2 March 2017 .

^ "Photographers Rights And The Law In The UK - the law and photography" .

www.urban75.org .

Archived from the original on 2 December 2021 . Retrieved 19 January 2017 .

^ Linda Macpherson LL.B, Dip.L.P., LL.M – The UK Photographers Rights Guide Archived 2009-04-28 at the Wayback Machine ^ Mosley v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2008] EWHC 1777 (QB) ^ Campbell v Mirror Group Newspapers Ltd [2004] UKHL 22 ^ Murray v Express Newspapers Plc [2008] EWCA Civ 446 ^ Human Rights Act 1998 sections 2 & 3 ^ Human Rights Act 1998 Schedule 1, Part 1, Article 8 External links [ edit ] Media related to Photographs at Wikimedia Commons The dictionary definition of photograph at Wiktionary v t e Photography Equipment Camera light-field digital field instant phone pinhole press rangefinder SLR still TLR toy view Darkroom enlarger safelight Film base format holder stock available films discontinued films Filter Flash beauty dish cucoloris gobo hot shoe lens hood monolight reflector snoot softbox Lens long-focus prime zoom wide-angle fisheye swivel telephoto Manufacturers Monopod Movie projector Slide projector Tripod head Zone plate Terminology 35 mm equivalent focal length Angle of view Aperture Backscatter Black-and-white Chromatic aberration Circle of confusion Clipping Color balance Color temperature Depth of field Depth of focus Exposure Exposure compensation Exposure value Zebra patterning F-number Film format large medium Film speed Focal length Guide number Hyperfocal distance Lens flare Metering mode Perspective distortion Photograph Photographic printing Albumen Photographic processes Reciprocity Red-eye effect Science of photography Shutter speed Sync Zone System Genres Abstract Aerial Aircraft Architectural Astrophotography Banquet Candid Conceptual Conservation Cloudscape Documentary Eclipse Ethnographic Erotic Fashion Fine-art Fire Forensic Glamour High-speed Landscape Monochrome Nature Neues Sehen Nude Photojournalism Pictorialism Pornography Portrait Post-mortem Ruins Selfie space selfie Social documentary Sports Still life Stock Straight photography Street Underwater Vernacular Wedding Wildlife Techniques Afocal Bokeh Brenizer Burst mode Contre-jour Crittercam ( Pigeon photography ) ETTR Fill flash Fireworks Hand-colouring Harris shutter High-speed Holography Infrared Intentional camera movement Kirlian Kite aerial Lo-fi photography Lomography Long-exposure Luminogram Macro Mordançage Multiple exposure Multi-exposure HDR capture Night Panning Panoramic Photogram Print toning Redscale Rephotography Rollout Scanography Schlieren photography Sabattier effect Slow motion Stereoscopy Stopping down Strip Slit-scan Sprocket hole Sun printing Tilt–shift Miniature faking Time-lapse Ultraviolet Vignetting Xerography Zoom burst Composition Diagonal method Framing Headroom Lead room Rule of thirds Simplicity Golden triangle (composition) History Timeline of photography technology Ambrotype Film photography Autochrome Lumière Box camera Calotype Camera obscura Daguerreotype Dufaycolor Heliography Lippmann plate Painted photography backdrops Photography and the law Glass plate Tintype Visual arts Regional Albania Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Greece India Japan Korea Luxembourg Norway Philippines Serbia Slovenia Sudan Taiwan Turkey Ukraine United States Uzbekistan Vietnam Digital photography Digital camera D-SLR comparison MILC camera back Digiscoping Comparison of digital and film photography Film scanner Image sensor CMOS APS CCD Three-CCD camera Foveon X3 sensor Image sharing Pixel Color photography Print film Chromogenic print Reversal film Color management color space primary color CMYK color model RGB color model Photographic processing Bleach bypass C-41 process Collodion process Cross processing Cyanotype Developer Digital image processing Dye coupler E-6 process Fixer Gelatin silver process Gum printing Instant film K-14 process Print permanence Push processing Stop bath Lists Largest photographs Most expensive photographs Museums devoted to one photographer Photographs considered the most important Photographers Norwegian Polish street women Photography periodicals Related Conservation and restoration of photographs film photographic plates Polaroid art Stereoscopy Say cheese v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Latvia Israel Other IdRef NARA 2 Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐79fd654b9f‐74w6m
Cached time: 20250818142931
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.474 seconds
Real time usage: 0.570 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2956/1000000
Revision size: 25965/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 109727/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2582/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 92797/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.283/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6070640/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  434.522      1 -total
 47.30%  205.529      1 Template:Reflist
 25.76%  111.944     10 Template:Cite_web
 15.55%   67.548      3 Template:Navbox
 14.59%   63.402      1 Template:Photography_subject
 10.31%   44.795      1 Template:Authority_control
 10.14%   44.051      1 Template:Short_description
  7.45%   32.387      4 Template:Cite_journal
  5.78%   25.120      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.54%   24.062      1 Template:Commons_category-inline Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:25080:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818142931 and revision id 1306575194. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Photograph&oldid=1306575194 " Categories : Photographs Photography Visual arts media Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 14:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Photograph 52 languages Add topic

