Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Discrete distributions Toggle Discrete distributions subsection 1.1 With finite support 1.2 With infinite support 2 Absolutely continuous distributions Toggle Absolutely continuous distributions subsection 2.1 Supported on a bounded interval 2.1.1 Supported on intervals of length 2 π – directional distributions 2.2 Supported on semi-infinite intervals, usually [0,∞) 2.3 Supported on the whole real line 2.4 With variable support 3 Mixed discrete/continuous distributions 4 Joint distributions Toggle Joint distributions subsection 4.1 Two or more random variables on the same sample space 4.2 Distributions of matrix-valued random variables 5 Non-numeric distributions 6 Miscellaneous distributions 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents List of probability distributions 12 languages العربية Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Magyar Português Русский Slovenščina Українська 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Many probability distributions that are important in theory or applications have been given specific names.

Discrete distributions [ edit ] Binomial distribution Degenerate distribution With finite support [ edit ] The Bernoulli distribution , which takes value 1 with probability p and value 0 with probability q = 1 − p .

The Rademacher distribution , which takes value 1 with probability 1/2 and value −1 with probability 1/2.

The binomial distribution , which describes the number of successes in a series of independent Yes/No experiments all with the same probability of success.

The beta-binomial distribution , which describes the number of successes in a series of independent Yes/No experiments with heterogeneity in the success probability.

The degenerate distribution at x 0 , where X is certain to take the value x 0 . This does not look random, but it satisfies the definition of random variable . This is useful because it puts deterministic variables and random variables in the same formalism.

The discrete uniform distribution , where all elements of a finite set are equally likely. This is the theoretical distribution model for a balanced coin, an unbiased die, a casino roulette, or the first card of a well-shuffled deck.

The hypergeometric distribution , which describes the number of successes in the first m of a series of n consecutive Yes/No experiments, if the total number of successes is known. This distribution arises when there is no replacement.

The negative hypergeometric distribution , a distribution which describes the number of attempts needed to get the n th success in a series of Yes/No experiments without replacement.

The Poisson binomial distribution , which describes the number of successes in a series of independent Yes/No experiments with different success probabilities.

Fisher's noncentral hypergeometric distribution Wallenius' noncentral hypergeometric distribution Benford's law , which describes the frequency of the first digit of many naturally occurring data.

The ideal and robust soliton distributions .

Zipf's law or the Zipf distribution. A discrete power-law distribution , the most famous example of which is the description of the frequency of words in the English language.

The Zipf–Mandelbrot law is a discrete power law distribution which is a generalization of the Zipf distribution.

Conway–Maxwell–Poisson distribution Poisson distribution Skellam distribution With infinite support [ edit ] The beta negative binomial distribution The Boltzmann distribution , a discrete distribution important in statistical physics which describes the probabilities of the various discrete energy levels of a system in thermal equilibrium . It has a continuous analogue. Special cases include: The Gibbs distribution The Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution The Borel distribution The discrete phase-type distribution , a generalization of the geometric distribution which describes the first hit time of the absorbing state of a finite terminating Markov chain .

The extended negative binomial distribution The generalized log-series distribution The Gauss–Kuzmin distribution The geometric distribution , a discrete distribution which describes the number of attempts needed to get the first success in a series of independent Bernoulli trials, or alternatively only the number of losses before the first success (i.e. one less).

The Hermite distribution The logarithmic (series) distribution The mixed Poisson distribution The negative binomial distribution or Pascal distribution, a generalization of the geometric distribution to the n th success.

The discrete compound Poisson distribution The parabolic fractal distribution The Poisson distribution , which describes a very large number of individually unlikely events that happen in a certain time interval. Related to this distribution are a number of other distributions: the displaced Poisson , the hyper-Poisson, the general Poisson binomial and the Poisson type distributions.

The Conway–Maxwell–Poisson distribution , a two-parameter extension of the Poisson distribution with an adjustable rate of decay.

The zero-truncated Poisson distribution , for processes in which zero counts are not observed The Polya–Eggenberger distribution The Skellam distribution , the distribution of the difference between two independent Poisson-distributed random variables.

The skew elliptical distribution The Yule–Simon distribution The zeta distribution has uses in applied statistics and statistical mechanics, and perhaps may be of interest to number theorists. It is the Zipf distribution for an infinite number of elements.

The Hardy distribution , which describes the probabilities of the hole scores for a given golf player.

Absolutely continuous distributions [ edit ] Beta distribution Kumaraswamy distribution Continuous uniform distribution Supported on a bounded interval [ edit ] The Beta distribution on [0,1], a family of two-parameter distributions with one mode, of which the uniform distribution is a special case, and which is useful in estimating success probabilities.

The four-parameter Beta distribution , a straight-forward generalization of the Beta distribution to arbitrary bounded intervals [ a , b ] {\displaystyle [a,b]} .

The arcsine distribution on [ a , b ], which is a special case of the Beta distribution if α = β = 1/2, a = 0, and b = 1.

The PERT distribution is a special case of the four-parameter beta distribution .

The uniform distribution or rectangular distribution on [ a , b ], where all points in a finite interval are equally likely, is a special case of the four-parameter Beta distribution.

The Irwin–Hall distribution is the distribution of the sum of n independent random variables, each of which having the uniform distribution on [0,1].

The Bates distribution is the distribution of the mean of n independent random variables, each of which having the uniform distribution on [0,1].

The logit-normal distribution on (0,1).

The Dirac delta function , although not strictly a probability distribution, is a limiting form of many continuous probability functions. It represents a discrete probability distribution concentrated at 0 — a degenerate distribution — it is a Distribution (mathematics) in the generalized function sense; but the notation treats it as if it were a continuous distribution.

The Kent distribution on the two-dimensional sphere.

The Kumaraswamy distribution is as versatile as the Beta distribution but has simple closed forms for both the cdf and the pdf.

The logit metalog distribution , which is highly shape-flexible, has simple closed forms, and can be parameterized with data using linear least squares.

The Marchenko–Pastur distribution is important in the theory of random matrices .

The bounded quantile-parameterized distributions , which are highly shape-flexible and can be parameterized with data using linear least squares (see Quantile-parameterized distribution#Transformations ) The raised cosine distribution on [ μ μ − − s , μ μ + s {\displaystyle \mu -s,\mu +s} ] The reciprocal distribution The triangular distribution on [ a , b ], a special case of which is the distribution of the sum of two independent uniformly distributed random variables (the convolution of two uniform distributions).

The trapezoidal distribution The truncated normal distribution on [ a , b ].

The U-quadratic distribution on [ a , b ].

The von Mises–Fisher distribution on the N -dimensional sphere has the von Mises distribution as a special case.

The Bingham distribution on the N -dimensional sphere.

The Wigner semicircle distribution is important in the theory of random matrices .

The continuous Bernoulli distribution is a one-parameter exponential family that provides a probabilistic counterpart to the binary cross-entropy loss.

Chi-squared distribution Gamma distribution Pareto distribution Supported on intervals of length 2 π – directional distributions [ edit ] The Henyey–Greenstein phase function The Mie phase function The von Mises distribution The wrapped normal distribution The wrapped exponential distribution The wrapped Lévy distribution The wrapped Cauchy distribution The wrapped Laplace distribution The wrapped asymmetric Laplace distribution The Dirac comb of period 2 π , although not strictly a function, is a limiting form of many directional distributions. It is essentially a wrapped Dirac delta function . It represents a discrete probability distribution concentrated at 2 π n — a degenerate distribution — but the notation treats it as if it were a continuous distribution.

Supported on semi-infinite intervals, usually [0,∞) [ edit ] The Beta prime distribution The Birnbaum–Saunders distribution , also known as the fatigue life distribution, is a probability distribution used extensively in reliability applications to model failure times.

The chi distribution The noncentral chi distribution The chi-squared distribution , which is the sum of the squares of n independent Gaussian random variables. It is a special case of the Gamma distribution, and it is used in goodness-of-fit tests in statistics .

The inverse-chi-squared distribution The noncentral chi-squared distribution The scaled inverse chi-squared distribution The Dagum distribution The exponential distribution , which describes the time between consecutive rare random events in a process with no memory.

The exponential-logarithmic distribution The F-distribution , which is the distribution of the ratio of two (normalized) chi-squared-distributed random variables, used in the analysis of variance . It is referred to as the beta prime distribution when it is the ratio of two chi-squared variates which are not normalized by dividing them by their numbers of degrees of freedom.

The noncentral F-distribution The folded normal distribution The Fréchet distribution The Gamma distribution , which describes the time until n consecutive rare random events occur in a process with no memory.

The Erlang distribution , which is a special case of the gamma distribution with integral shape parameter, developed to predict waiting times in queuing systems The inverse-gamma distribution The generalized gamma distribution The generalized Pareto distribution The Gamma/Gompertz distribution The Gompertz distribution The half-normal distribution The Hartman–Watson distribution Hotelling's T-squared distribution The inverse Gaussian distribution , also known as the Wald distribution The Lévy distribution The log-Cauchy distribution The log-Laplace distribution The log-logistic distribution The log-metalog distribution , which is highly shape-flexile, has simple closed forms, can be parameterized with data using linear least squares, and subsumes the log-logistic distribution as a special case.

The log-normal distribution , describing variables which can be modelled as the product of many small independent positive variables.

The Lomax distribution The Mittag-Leffler distribution The Nakagami distribution The Pareto distribution , or "power law" distribution, used in the analysis of financial data and critical behavior.

The Pearson Type III distribution The phase-type distribution , used in queueing theory The phased bi-exponential distribution is commonly used in pharmacokinetics The phased bi-Weibull distribution The semi-bounded quantile-parameterized distributions , which are highly shape-flexible and can be parameterized with data using linear least squares (see Quantile-parameterized distribution § Transformations The Rayleigh distribution The Rayleigh mixture distribution The Rice distribution The shifted Gompertz distribution The type-2 Gumbel distribution The Weibull distribution or Rosin Rammler distribution, of which the exponential distribution is a special case, is used to model the lifetime of technical devices and is used to describe the particle size distribution of particles generated by grinding, milling and crushing operations.

The modified half-normal distribution .

[ 1 ] The Polya-Gamma distribution [ 2 ] The modified Polya-gamma distribution .

[ 3 ] Cauchy distribution Johnson SU distribution Laplace distribution Stable distribution Supported on the whole real line [ edit ] The Behrens–Fisher distribution , which arises in the Behrens–Fisher problem .

The Cauchy distribution , an example of a distribution which does not have an expected value or a variance . In physics it is usually called a Lorentzian profile , and is associated with many processes, including resonance energy distribution, impact and natural spectral line broadening and quadratic stark line broadening.

The centralized inverse-Fano distribution , which is the distribution representing the ratio of independent normal and gamma-difference random variables.

Chernoff's distribution The exponentially modified Gaussian distribution , a convolution of a normal distribution with an exponential distribution , and the Gaussian minus exponential distribution , a convolution of a normal distribution with the negative of an exponential distribution.

The expectile distribution , which nests the Gaussian distribution in the symmetric case.

The Fisher–Tippett , extreme value, or log-Weibull distribution Fisher's z-distribution The skewed generalized t distribution The gamma-difference distribution , which is the distribution of the difference of independent gamma random variables.

The generalized logistic distribution The generalized normal distribution The geometric stable distribution The Gumbel distribution The Holtsmark distribution , an example of a distribution that has a finite expected value but infinite variance.

The hyperbolic distribution The hyperbolic secant distribution The Johnson SU distribution The Landau distribution The Laplace distribution The Lévy skew alpha-stable distribution or stable distribution is a family of distributions often used to characterize financial data and critical behavior; the Cauchy distribution , Holtsmark distribution , Landau distribution , Lévy distribution and normal distribution are special cases.

The Linnik distribution The logistic distribution The map-Airy distribution The metalog distribution , which is highly shape-flexible, has simple closed forms, and can be parameterized with data using linear least squares.

The normal distribution , also called the Gaussian or the bell curve. It is ubiquitous in nature and statistics due to the central limit theorem : every variable that can be modelled as a sum of many small independent, identically distributed variables with finite mean and variance is approximately normal.

The normal-exponential-gamma distribution The normal-inverse Gaussian distribution The Pearson Type IV distribution (see Pearson distributions ) The Quantile-parameterized distributions , which are highly shape-flexible and can be parameterized with data using linear least squares.

The skew normal distribution Student's t-distribution , useful for estimating unknown means of Gaussian populations.

The noncentral t-distribution The skew t distribution The Champernowne distribution The type-1 Gumbel distribution The Tracy–Widom distribution The Voigt distribution , or Voigt profile, is the convolution of a normal distribution and a Cauchy distribution . It is found in spectroscopy when spectral line profiles are broadened by a mixture of Lorentzian and Doppler broadening mechanisms.

The Chen distribution .

With variable support [ edit ] The generalized extreme value distribution has a finite upper bound or a finite lower bound depending on what range the value of one of the parameters of the distribution is in (or is supported on the whole real line for one special value of the parameter The generalized Pareto distribution has a support which is either bounded below only, or bounded both above and below The metalog distribution , which provides flexibility for unbounded, bounded, and semi-bounded support, is highly shape-flexible, has simple closed forms, and can be fit to data using linear least squares.

The Tukey lambda distribution is either supported on the whole real line, or on a bounded interval, depending on what range the value of one of the parameters of the distribution is in.

The Wakeby distribution Mixed discrete/continuous distributions [ edit ] The rectified Gaussian distribution replaces negative values from a normal distribution with a discrete component at zero.

The compound poisson-gamma or Tweedie distribution is continuous over the strictly positive real numbers, with a mass at zero.

Joint distributions [ edit ] For any set of independent random variables the probability density function of their joint distribution is the product of their individual density functions.

Two or more random variables on the same sample space [ edit ] The Dirichlet distribution , a generalization of the beta distribution .

The Ewens's sampling formula is a probability distribution on the set of all partitions of an integer n , arising in population genetics .

The Balding–Nichols model The multinomial distribution , a generalization of the binomial distribution .

The multivariate normal distribution , a generalization of the normal distribution .

The multivariate t-distribution , a generalization of the Student's t-distribution .

The negative multinomial distribution , a generalization of the negative binomial distribution .

The Dirichlet negative multinomial distribution , a generalization of the beta negative binomial distribution .

The generalized multivariate log-gamma distribution The Marshall–Olkin exponential distribution The continuous-categorical distribution , an exponential family supported on the simplex that generalizes the continuous Bernoulli distribution .

Distributions of matrix-valued random variables [ edit ] The Wishart distribution The inverse-Wishart distribution The Lewandowski-Kurowicka-Joe distribution The matrix normal distribution The matrix t-distribution The Matrix Langevin distribution The matrix variate beta distribution The Uniform distribution on a Stiefel manifold Non-numeric distributions [ edit ] The categorical distribution Miscellaneous distributions [ edit ] The Cantor distribution The generalized logistic distribution family The metalog distribution family The Pearson distribution family The phase-type distribution See also [ edit ] Mixture distribution Relationships among probability distributions ProbOnto References [ edit ] ^ Sun, Jingchao; Kong, Maiying; Pal, Subhadip (22 June 2021).

"The Modified-Half-Normal distribution: Properties and an efficient sampling scheme" .

Communications in Statistics - Theory and Methods .

52 (5): 1591– 1613.

doi : 10.1080/03610926.2021.1934700 .

ISSN 0361-0926 .

S2CID 237919587 .

^ Polson, Nicholas G.; Scott, James G.; Windle, Jesse (2013).

"Bayesian Inference for Logistic Models Using Pólya–Gamma Latent Variables" .

Journal of the American Statistical Association .

108 (504): 1339– 1349.

arXiv : 1205.0310 .

doi : 10.1080/01621459.2013.829001 .

ISSN 0162-1459 .

JSTOR 24247065 .

S2CID 2859721 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 .

^ Pal, Subhadip; Gaskins, Jeremy (23 May 2022).

"Modified Pólya-Gamma data augmentation for Bayesian analysis of directional data" .

Journal of Statistical Computation and Simulation .

92 (16): 3430– 3451.

doi : 10.1080/00949655.2022.2067853 .

S2CID 249022546 .

v t e Probability distributions ( list ) Discrete univariate with finite support Benford Bernoulli Beta-binomial Binomial Categorical Hypergeometric Negative Poisson binomial Rademacher Soliton Discrete uniform Zipf Zipf–Mandelbrot with infinite support Beta negative binomial Borel Conway–Maxwell–Poisson Discrete phase-type Delaporte Extended negative binomial Flory–Schulz Gauss–Kuzmin Geometric Logarithmic Mixed Poisson Negative binomial Panjer Parabolic fractal Poisson Skellam Yule–Simon Zeta Continuous univariate supported on a bounded interval Arcsine ARGUS Balding–Nichols Bates Beta Generalized Beta rectangular Continuous Bernoulli Irwin–Hall Kumaraswamy Logit-normal Noncentral beta PERT Raised cosine Reciprocal Triangular U-quadratic Uniform Wigner semicircle supported on a semi-infinite interval Benini Benktander 1st kind Benktander 2nd kind Beta prime Burr Chi Chi-squared Noncentral Inverse Scaled Dagum Davis Erlang Hyper Exponential Hyperexponential Hypoexponential Logarithmic F Noncentral Folded normal Fréchet Gamma Generalized Inverse gamma/Gompertz Gompertz Shifted Half-logistic Half-normal Hotelling's T -squared Hartman–Watson Inverse Gaussian Generalized Kolmogorov Lévy Log-Cauchy Log-Laplace Log-logistic Log-normal Log-t Lomax Matrix-exponential Maxwell–Boltzmann Maxwell–Jüttner Mittag-Leffler Nakagami Pareto Phase-type Poly-Weibull Rayleigh Relativistic Breit–Wigner Rice Truncated normal type-2 Gumbel Weibull Discrete Wilks's lambda supported on the whole real line Cauchy Exponential power Fisher's z Kaniadakis κ-Gaussian Gaussian q Generalized hyperbolic Generalized logistic (logistic-beta) Generalized normal Geometric stable Gumbel Holtsmark Hyperbolic secant Johnson's S U Landau Laplace Asymmetric Logistic Noncentral t Normal (Gaussian) Normal-inverse Gaussian Skew normal Slash Stable Student's t Tracy–Widom Variance-gamma Voigt with support whose type varies Generalized chi-squared Generalized extreme value Generalized Pareto Marchenko–Pastur Kaniadakis κ -exponential Kaniadakis κ -Gamma Kaniadakis κ -Weibull Kaniadakis κ -Logistic Kaniadakis κ -Erlang q -exponential q -Gaussian q -Weibull Shifted log-logistic Tukey lambda Mixed univariate continuous- discrete Rectified Gaussian Multivariate (joint) Discrete: Ewens Multinomial Dirichlet Negative Continuous: Dirichlet Generalized Multivariate Laplace Multivariate normal Multivariate stable Multivariate t Normal-gamma Inverse Matrix-valued: LKJ Matrix beta Matrix normal Matrix t Matrix gamma Inverse Wishart Normal Inverse Normal-inverse Complex Uniform distribution on a Stiefel manifold Directional Univariate (circular) directional Circular uniform Univariate von Mises Wrapped normal Wrapped Cauchy Wrapped exponential Wrapped asymmetric Laplace Wrapped Lévy Bivariate (spherical) Kent Bivariate (toroidal) Bivariate von Mises Multivariate von Mises–Fisher Bingham Degenerate and singular Degenerate Dirac delta function Singular Cantor Families Circular Compound Poisson Elliptical Exponential Natural exponential Location–scale Maximum entropy Mixture Pearson Tweedie Wrapped Category Commons v t e Statistics Outline Index Descriptive statistics Continuous data Center Mean Arithmetic Arithmetic-Geometric Contraharmonic Cubic Generalized/power Geometric Harmonic Heronian Heinz Lehmer Median Mode Dispersion Average absolute deviation Coefficient of variation Interquartile range Percentile Range Standard deviation Variance Shape Central limit theorem Moments Kurtosis L-moments Skewness Count data Index of dispersion Summary tables Contingency table Frequency distribution Grouped data Dependence Partial correlation Pearson product-moment correlation Rank correlation Kendall's τ Spearman's ρ Scatter plot Graphics Bar chart Biplot Box plot Control chart Correlogram Fan chart Forest plot Histogram Pie chart Q–Q plot Radar chart Run chart Scatter plot Stem-and-leaf display Violin plot Data collection Study design Effect size Missing data Optimal design Population Replication Sample size determination Statistic Statistical power Survey methodology Sampling Cluster Stratified Opinion poll Questionnaire Standard error Controlled experiments Blocking Factorial experiment Interaction Random assignment Randomized controlled trial Randomized experiment Scientific control Adaptive designs Adaptive clinical trial Stochastic approximation Up-and-down designs Observational studies Cohort study Cross-sectional study Natural experiment Quasi-experiment Statistical inference Statistical theory Population Statistic Probability distribution Sampling distribution Order statistic Empirical distribution Density estimation Statistical model Model specification L p space Parameter location scale shape Parametric family Likelihood (monotone) Location–scale family Exponential family Completeness Sufficiency Statistical functional Bootstrap U V Optimal decision loss function Efficiency Statistical distance divergence Asymptotics Robustness Frequentist inference Point estimation Estimating equations Maximum likelihood Method of moments M-estimator Minimum distance Unbiased estimators Mean-unbiased minimum-variance Rao–Blackwellization Lehmann–Scheffé theorem Median unbiased Plug-in Interval estimation Confidence interval Pivot Likelihood interval Prediction interval Tolerance interval Resampling Bootstrap Jackknife Testing hypotheses 1- & 2-tails Power Uniformly most powerful test Permutation test Randomization test Multiple comparisons Parametric tests Likelihood-ratio Score/Lagrange multiplier Wald Specific tests Z -test (normal) Student's t -test F -test Goodness of fit Chi-squared G -test Kolmogorov–Smirnov Anderson–Darling Lilliefors Jarque–Bera Normality (Shapiro–Wilk) Likelihood-ratio test Model selection Cross validation AIC BIC Rank statistics Sign Sample median Signed rank (Wilcoxon) Hodges–Lehmann estimator Rank sum (Mann–Whitney) Nonparametric anova 1-way (Kruskal–Wallis) 2-way (Friedman) Ordered alternative (Jonckheere–Terpstra) Van der Waerden test Bayesian inference Bayesian probability prior posterior Credible interval Bayes factor Bayesian estimator Maximum posterior estimator Correlation Regression analysis Correlation Pearson product-moment Partial correlation Confounding variable Coefficient of determination Regression analysis Errors and residuals Regression validation Mixed effects models Simultaneous equations models Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) Linear regression Simple linear regression Ordinary least squares General linear model Bayesian regression Non-standard predictors Nonlinear regression Nonparametric Semiparametric Isotonic Robust Homoscedasticity and Heteroscedasticity Generalized linear model Exponential families Logistic (Bernoulli) / Binomial / Poisson regressions Partition of variance Analysis of variance (ANOVA, anova) Analysis of covariance Multivariate ANOVA Degrees of freedom Categorical / multivariate / time-series / survival analysis Categorical Cohen's kappa Contingency table Graphical model Log-linear model McNemar's test Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel statistics Multivariate Regression Manova Principal components Canonical correlation Discriminant analysis Cluster analysis Classification Structural equation model Factor analysis Multivariate distributions Elliptical distributions Normal Time-series General Decomposition Trend Stationarity Seasonal adjustment Exponential smoothing Cointegration Structural break Granger causality Specific tests Dickey–Fuller Johansen Q-statistic (Ljung–Box) Durbin–Watson Breusch–Godfrey Time domain Autocorrelation (ACF) partial (PACF) Cross-correlation (XCF) ARMA model ARIMA model (Box–Jenkins) Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) Vector autoregression (VAR) Frequency domain Spectral density estimation Fourier analysis Least-squares spectral analysis Wavelet Whittle likelihood Survival Survival function Kaplan–Meier estimator (product limit) Proportional hazards models Accelerated failure time (AFT) model First hitting time Hazard function Nelson–Aalen estimator Test Log-rank test Applications Biostatistics Bioinformatics Clinical trials / studies Epidemiology Medical statistics Engineering statistics Chemometrics Methods engineering Probabilistic design Process / quality control Reliability System identification Social statistics Actuarial science Census Crime statistics Demography Econometrics Jurimetrics National accounts Official statistics Population statistics Psychometrics Spatial statistics Cartography Environmental statistics Geographic information system Geostatistics Kriging Category Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_probability_distributions&oldid=1288383171 " Categories : Statistics-related lists Probability distributions Types of probability distributions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 May 2025, at 07:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of probability distributions 12 languages Add topic

