Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Theology Toggle Theology subsection 2.1 Jewish 2.2 Catholic Church 2.3 Eastern Orthodox Church 2.4 Lutheranism 2.5 Reformed 2.6 Arminian 2.7 Swedenborgian 2.8 Latter Day Saint (LDS) 2.9 Islam 3 Text of Scripture 4 Politics 5 See also 6 Notes and references Toggle Notes and references subsection 6.1 Citations 6.2 Sources 7 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 7.1 Christian material 7.2 Jewish material 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Divine providence 36 languages العربية Bamanankan বাংলা Башҡортса Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kiswahili Latina Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Svenska Українська ייִדיש Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia God's intervention in the universe For the album, see Divine Providence (album) .

Sculpture of the Eye of Providence in the relief of the Kazan Cathedral, Saint Petersburg Part of a series on the Attributes of God in Christianity Core attributes Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Eternity Overarching attributes Aseity Oneness Perfection Trinity Miscellaneous Graciousness Holiness Immanence Immutability Impassibility Impeccability Incomprehensibility Incorporeality Kingship Mission Providence Conservation Righteousness Simplicity Sovereignty Transcendence Veracity Emotions expressed by God Jealousy Love Mercy Will Wrath v t e Michelangelo's painting In theology , divine providence , or simply providence , is God 's intervention in the universe . The term Divine Providence (usually capitalized) is also used as a title of God . A distinction is usually made between "general providence", which refers to God's continuous upholding of the existence and natural order of the universe, and "special providence", which refers to God's extraordinary intervention in the life of people.

[ 1 ] Miracles and even retribution generally fall in the latter category.

[ 2 ] Etymology [ edit ] "Divine" evolved in the late 14th century to mean "pertaining to, in the nature of or proceeding from God or a god". This came from the Old French devin , with a similar meaning, and that from the Latin divinus , meaning "of a god", in turn from divus , with similar meaning, which was related the Latin deus , meaning god or deity. The word "providence" comes from Latin providentia meaning foresight or prudence , and that in turn from pro- "ahead" and videre "to see".

[ 3 ] The current use of the word in the secular sense refers to foresight, or "timely preparation for eventualities", [ 4 ] or (if one is a deist or an atheist ) "nature as providing protective care".

[ 5 ] Theology [ edit ] Jewish [ edit ] Main article: Divine providence in Judaism Divine providence ( Hebrew : השגחה פרטית , romanized : Hashgochoh Protis / Hashgachah Pratit , lit.

'[Divine] supervision of the individual') is discussed throughout Rabbinic literature , and in particular by the classical Jewish philosophers. These writings maintain that divine providence means that God is directing (or even recreating) every minute detail of creation. This analysis thus underpins much of Orthodox Judaism 's world view , particularly regarding questions of interaction with the natural world.

[ 6 ] Catholic Church [ edit ] See also: divine conservation Augustine of Hippo is often associated with the doctrine of divine providence in the Latin West . Augustine held that the universe is under the continuous control and unifying governance of a single Supreme Being, since God's governance takes place over a vast multitude of relatively independent individuals differing in nature, function, and end.

[ 7 ] Christian teaching on Providence in the High Middle Ages was most fully developed by Thomas Aquinas in the Summa Theologica . The concept of providence as care exercised by God over the universe, his foresight and care for its future is extensively developed and explained both by Aquinas himself and modern Thomists . One of the foremost modern Thomists, Dominican father Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange , wrote a study of providence entitled Providence: God's loving care for men and the need for confidence in Almighty God.

In it, he presents and solves, according to Catholic doctrine, the most difficult issues as related to Providence. However, Jean Pierre de Caussade (7 March 1675 – 8 December 1751) was a French Jesuit priest and writer. He is especially known for the work ascribed to him known as Abandonment to Divine Providence , and also his work with the Nuns of the Visitation in Nancy, France.

Eastern Orthodox Church [ edit ] The doctrine of providence in Eastern Orthodoxy is set out by St.

John of Tobolsk : [ 8 ] St. John Damascene describes it thus: "Providence is Divine will which maintains everything and wisely rules over everything" .... It was not by chance that the iniquitous Israeli King Ahab was struck by an arrow that flew in between the seams of his armor. Truly that arrow was directed by the hand of God, just as was the one which struck Julian the Apostate; only for the soldier who let fly the arrow was it accidental. It was not by chance that swallows flew into the home of Tobit and blinded the righteous man. This happened at God’s command, in order to hold Tobit up as an example to succeeding generations, as we learn from the Angel who accompanied his son Tobias. Nothing happens by chance. It was not by chance that Caesar Augustus ordered the census to be taken in the year of Christ’s Nativity. It was not by chance that Christ met with the Samaritan woman at the well in Sychar and spoke with her. All this was foreseen and written down in the books of Divine Providence before the beginning of time.

Lutheranism [ edit ] See also: Lutheranism In Lutheran theology, divine providence refers to God's preservation of creation , his cooperation with everything that happens, and his guiding of the universe.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] While God cooperates with both good and evil deeds, with the evil deeds he does so only in as much as they are deeds, not with the evil in them. God concurs with an act's effect, but he does not cooperate in the corruption of an act or the evil of its effect.

[ 13 ] Lutherans believe everything exists for the sake of the Christian Church, and that God guides everything for its welfare and growth.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] According to Martin Luther , divine providence began when God created the world with everything needed for human life, including both physical things and natural laws .

[ 17 ] In Luther's Small Catechism , the explanation of the first article of the Apostles' Creed declares that everything people have that is good is given and preserved by God, either directly or through other people or things.

[ 18 ] Of the services others provide us through family, government , and work, he writes, "we receive these blessings not from them, but, through them, from God." [ 19 ] Since God uses everyone's useful tasks for good, people should look not down upon some useful vocations as being less worthy than others. Instead people should honor others, no matter how lowly, as being the means God uses to work in the world.

[ 19 ] Reformed [ edit ] See also: Reformed theology The concept of divine providence is an integral part of Reformed theology, which emphasizes the total depravity of man and the complete sovereignty of God. Article 13 of the Belgic Confession , a Reformed confession of faith , first outlines the doctrine, then explains why it does not entail that God is the author of evil, finally exhorting its readers to humility for this doctrine, which is said to afford great consolation to Christians.

[ 20 ] We believe that the same God, after he had created all things, did not forsake them, or give them up to fortune or chance, but that He rules and governs them according to his holy will, so that nothing happens in this world without his appointment: nevertheless, God neither is the author of, nor can be charged with the sins which are committed. For his power and goodness are so great and incomprehensible, that he orders and executes his work in the most excellent and just manner, even then, when devils and wicked men act unjustly.

The Confession draws from many biblical proof-texts, including Acts 4:27–28 ("For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou hast anointed, both Herod , and Pontius Pilate , with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, were gathered together, For to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done"). This text in particular is taken as illustrative of the concept of concursus dei ('divine concurrence'), which Reformed theologian Louis Berkhof defines as "the cooperation of the divine power with all subordinate powers, according to the pre-established laws of their operation, causing them to act and to act precisely as they do".

[ 21 ] In the case of Acts 4 , this means that the sinful doings of Herod, Pilate and others were permitted by God according to what his "counsel" had "determined before to be done". Divine providence and human free will are thus not regarded as contradictory; rather the former is said to be the very ordering principle of the latter (and furthermore, evil cannot be attributed to God, as his permitting of evil to occur was only in view of a greater end, which is the redemption of the elect in Acts 4). This has two implications: Firstly, that: "the powers of nature do not work by themselves, that is, simply by their own inherent power, but that God is immediately operative in every act of the creature." Secondly, that secondary causes "are real, and not to be regarded simply as the operative power of God. It is only on condition that second causes are real, that we can properly speak of a concurrence or co-operation of the First Cause with secondary causes." [ 21 ] The first implication, that God is "immediately operative in every act of the creature", and steers the course of creation according to his will, distinguishes the Reformed faith from deism which states that God created the world but leaves it as if it were a mere mechanism, without intervening. The second implication, that secondary or contingent causes exist, refutes the opposite extreme of deism, which is occasionalism or pantheism ; the idea that God is the only agent or cause that exists.

[ This quote needs a citation ] And, as to what he doth surpassing human understanding, we will not curiously inquire into, farther than our capacity will admit of; but with the greatest humility and reverence adore the righteous judgments of God, which are hid from us, contenting ourselves that we are disciples of Christ, to learn only those things which he has revealed to us in his word, without transgressing these limits. This doctrine affords us unspeakable consolation, since we are taught thereby, that nothing can befall us by chance, but by the direction of our most gracious and heavenly Father; who watches over us with a paternal care, keeping all creatures so under His power that not a hair of our head (for they are all numbered) nor a sparrow can fall to the ground, without the will of our Father, in whom we do entirely trust, being persuaded that he so restrains the devil and all our enemies, that without his will and permission, they cannot hurt us. And therefore we reject that damnable error of the Epicureans, who say that God regards nothing, but leaves all things to chance.

The Confession then takes a turn towards humility regarding this doctrine, "And as to what He doth surpassing human understanding, we will not curiously inquire into it further than our capacity will admit of;" while also proclaiming the "unspeakable consolation" that it affords for believers, who may be assured that nothing befalls them by chance but by the will of their Father. This is proved by the words of Christ in Matthew 10:29–31 : "Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? And one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows." Finally, the article rejects Epicureanism , an ancient philosophy which taught that the world is ultimately chaotic, and that there is no underlying order or predestination, rather that everything is subject to luck or random chance. The doctrine of providence, and its implications regarding the immanence of God in all secondary causes, and the fact that nothing can come to pass without his divine foreordination, stands in direct contradiction to Epicureanism, as it asserts that nothing is chaotic or random, but rather that everything is absolutely dependent upon the necessary will of God. Calvin gives the metaphor in the Institutes of the Christian Religion , that Creation is a great theatre, in which the epic drama of human history and redemption is played out, all according to the direction of the divine will.

[ 22 ] "My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions' mouths, that they have not hurt me" ( Daniel 6:22 ) Arminian [ edit ] At the beginning of the 17th century, the Dutch theologian Jacobus Arminius formulated Arminianism and disagreed with Calvin in particular on election and predestination .

[ 23 ] Arminianism is defined by God's limited mode of providence.

[ 24 ] This mode of providence affirms the compatibility between human free will and divine foreknowledge , but its incompatibility with theological determinism .

[ 25 ] Thus predestination in Arminianism is based on divine foreknowledge, unlike in Calvinism.

[ 26 ] It is therefore a predestination by foreknowledge.

[ 27 ] From this perspective, comes the notion of a conditional election on the one who wills to have faith in God for salvation.

[ 28 ] Swedenborgian [ edit ] See also: The New Church Divine Providence is a book published by Emanuel Swedenborg in 1764 which describes his systematic theology regarding providence, free will, theodicy , and other related topics. Both meanings of providence are applicable in Swedenborg's theology, in that providence encompasses understanding, intent and action. Divine providence relative to man is 'foresight', and relative to the Lord is 'providence'.

[ 29 ] Swedenborg proposes that one law of divine providence is that man should act from freedom according to reason, and that man is regenerated according to the faculties of rationality and liberty.

[ 30 ] Latter Day Saint (LDS) [ edit ] There is little theological literature on the term providence in LDS studies. As stated above, Reformed theology relates these terms to predestination, which does have more prominence in LDS theology , if only as a polemical term.

One particular text that could be interpreted as being related to such terms is in the Book of Abraham . As Abraham is shown the heavens, he is also shown the pre-mortal spirits of mankind: [ 31 ] And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born.

The "making of rulers" above is explained as foreordination (in the chapter summary) as opposed to "predestination".

[ 32 ] This differentiation balances free will (or free agency in LDS theology) against divine intervention . LDS scholar Richard Draper has described the church's position thus: [ 33 ] The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints rejects the belief in predestination – that God predetermines the salvation or the damnation of every individual .... The LDS position is based in part on the teachings of Paul that God "will render to every man according to his deeds" and that "there is no respect of persons with God" (Rom. 2:6, 11). These two principles provide a basis for understanding Paul's use of the term "predestination". The term apparently connoted "to be ordained beforehand for godly labor". In the sense that one's potential or calling has been recognized and declared, this interpretation conforms with the Greek term Paul used, proorizo , and does not denote an irreversible or irresistible predetermination.

However, this does not imply a passive God. LDS theology favours a more active, interventionist God. In a General Conference , Elder Ronald A. Rasband of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles articulates this: "Our lives are like a chessboard, and the Lord moves us from one place to another".

[ 34 ] Rasband continues by citing a well-known text from in the Book of Mormon [ 35 ] in which Nephi finds his nemesis unconscious from inebriation in front of him, he concludes, "Was he fortunate to just happen upon Laban? Or was it by 'divine design'?" [ 34 ] Although the text itself limits the interaction of the divine to the "Spirit" to commanding Nephi to "Slay him." [ 35 ] God also limits his involvement. Rasband interprets one particular passage from the Book of Mormon [ 36 ] as saying that God (through his Spirit) will only intervene based on righteousness.

[ 34 ] Rasband concludes that, "When we are righteous, willing, and able, when we are striving to be worthy and qualified, we progress to places we never imagined and become part of Heavenly Father's 'divine design'." [ 34 ] Islam [ edit ] When Moses ( Musa ) and Aaron ( Harun ) arrive in the court of Pharaoh , the Pharaoh begins questioning Musa about the God he follows. The Quran narrates Musa, answering the Pharaoh: [ 37 ] ۝ [ 38 ] He answered, our Lord is he who giveth all things: He hath created them, and directed them by his providence Text of Scripture [ edit ] Those who believe in the inerrancy of the original biblical manuscripts often accompany this belief with a statement about how the biblical text has been preserved so that what we have today is at least substantially similar to what was written. That is, just as God "divinely inspired the text", so he has also "divinely preserved it throughout the centuries".

[ 39 ] The Westminster Confession of Faith states that the Scriptures, "being immediately inspired by God, and by his singular care and providence kept pure in all ages, are therefore authentical." [ 40 ] This is an important argument in the " King James only " debates.

Edward F. Hills argues that the principle of providentially preserved transmission guarantees that the printed Textus Receptus must be the closest text to the Greek autographs .

[ 41 ] Politics [ edit ] In the United States Declaration of Independence , it is cited, "with a firm reliance on the Protection of Divine Providence we mutually pledge to each other our Lives, our Fortunes and our Sacred Honor".

See also [ edit ] Act of God Deism Destiny or Fate Determinism Eye of Providence Mortification in Catholic theology Providence Plantations , the original name of the Rhode Island mainland Providence, Rhode Island , named for "God's merciful Providence", which its founder believed had helped him discover the place to settle.

Qadar Russian avos' Synchronicity Tian Notes and references [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "Providence" .

The Concise Oxford Dictionary of World Religions .

Encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 17 July 2014 .

^ "Creation, Providence, and Miracle" .

Reasonable Faith . Retrieved 20 May 2014 .

^ "providence" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . 2019.

^ "providence" .

The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (5th ed.). HarperCollins.

^ "providence" .

Lexico . Oxford University Press and Dictionary.com. 2019. Archived from the original on 6 December 1998.

^ See Leibowitz, Aryeh (2018).

Hashgachah Pratis: An Exploration of Divine Providence and Free Will . Targum Press.

^ "Divine Providence".

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 12 . Retrieved 11 May 2023 – via NewAdvent.org.

^ "Divine Providence by St. John of Tobolsk" .

^ Mueller, J. T. (1934).

Christian Dogmatics . Concordia Publishing House. pp.

189– 195.

^ Fuerbringer, L. (1927).

Concordia Cyclopedia . Concordia Publishing House. p. 635.

^ "Divine Providence".

Christian Cyclopedia – via Google Books.

^ For further reading, see: Wessel, Louis (1909).

"The Proof Texts of the Catechism with a Practical Commentary" .

Theological Quarterly .

11 . "Divine Providence", p. 212 – via Google Books.

^ Mueller, Steven P. (2005).

Called to Believe, Teach, and Confess . Wipf & Stock. pp.

122– 123.

^ Mueller, J. T. (1934).

Christian Dogmatics . Concordia Publishing House. p. 190.

^ Edward, W. A. (1946).

A Short Explanation of Dr. Martin Luther's Small Catechism . Concordia Publishing House. p. 165.

^ Koepsell, Markus O.

"Divine Providence and Human Adversity" .

WLSEssays.net . Archived from the original on 7 July 2010.

^ Luther's Works Vol. 1 Lectures on Genesis Chapters 1-5 page 25, 47 ^ "Luther's Small Catechism, The Apostle's Creed" . Bookofconcord.com. Archived from the original on 28 November 2006 . Retrieved 17 July 2014 .

^ a b "Luther's Large Catechism, First Commandment" . Archived from the original on 17 May 2008 . Retrieved 4 November 2007 .

^ Reformed Protestant Dutch Church (U.S.), 1840, p. 45 ^ a b Berkhof, Louis (1974).

Systematic Theology (4th ed.). Grand Rapids, Michigan: W. B. Eerdman's Publishing Company. pp.

171– 172.

ISBN 080283020X .

^ Institutes of the Christian Religion . Translated by Beveridge, Henry. Edinburgh: Calvin Translation Society. 1855. p. 73.

^ Hindson, Ed; Mitchell, Dan (2013).

The Popular Encyclopedia of Church History . Eugene, Oregon: Harvest House Publishers. p. 46.

ISBN 9780736948067 .

OCLC 796760525 .

^ Olson 2018 : "What is Arminianism? A) Belief that God limits himself to give human beings free will to go against his perfect will so that God did not design or ordain sin and evil (or their consequences such as innocent suffering); B) Belief that, although sinners cannot achieve salvation on their own, without 'prevenient grace' (enabling grace), God makes salvation possible for all through Jesus Christ and offers free salvation to all through the gospel. 'A' is called 'limited providence,' 'B' is called 'predestination by foreknowledge.

' " ^ Wiley 1940 , Chap. 14.

^ Wiley 1940 , Chap. 26.

^ Olson 2018 , ...

^ Elwell, Walter A. (2001).

Evangelical Dictionary of Theology (2nd ed.). Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Academic. p. 98.

ISBN 9780801020759 .

OCLC 46998739 .

^ S. Warren, Compendium of Swedenborg's Theological Writings, page 480 ^ Swedenborg, E. Divine Providence, note 71-73 ^ "Abraham 3" . ChurchofJesusChrist.org . Retrieved 18 October 2017 .

^ "I Have a Question - Ensign Dec. 1990 - ensign" . ChurchofJesusChrist.org . Retrieved 18 October 2017 .

^ "Predestination" .

The Encyclopedia of Mormonism . Retrieved 18 October 2017 .

^ a b c d Rasband, Ronald A.

"By Divine Design" . ChurchofJesusChrist.org . Retrieved 18 October 2017 .

^ a b "1 Nephi 4" . ChurchofJesusChrist.org . Retrieved 18 October 2017 .

^ "Helaman 4" . ChurchofJesusChrist.org . Retrieved 18 October 2017 .

^ Quran 20:50 George Sale translation ^ Arabic script in Unicode symbol for a Quran verse , U+06DD, page 3, Proposal for additional Unicode characters ^ "Inerrancy and its Implications for Authority: Textual Critical Considerations in Formulating an Evangelical Doctrine of Scripture" .

Quodlibet .

4 (4). November 2002. Archived from the original on 17 November 2011 . Retrieved 23 October 2011 .

^ Westminster Confession of Faith , I.viii.

^ Hills, Edward F.

King James Version Defended!

. pp.

199– 200.

Sources [ edit ] Reformed Protestant Dutch Church (U.S.) (1840).

The Constitution of the Reformed Dutch Church of North America/The Confession of Faith . Philadelphia: G. W. Mentz & Son.

OCLC 1042542981 – via Wikisource .

Olson, Roger E. (2018).

"Calvinism and Arminianism Compared" .

Roger E. Olson: My evangelical, Arminian theological musings . Patheos . Retrieved 27 August 2019 .

Wiley, H. Orton (1940).

Christian theology . Kansas City, Missouri: Beacon Hill Press.

3 vols.

Further reading [ edit ] Christian material [ edit ] Hodge, Charles . "Providence".

Systematic Theology – via Christian Classics Ethereal Library .

Aquinas, Thomas .

Summa Theologica: The Providence of God . Archived from the original on 11 December 2006 – via NewAdvent.org and Internet Archive.

Traditional teaching of the Catholic Church.

Garrigou-Lagrange, Reginald.

"Providence" .

EWTN.com .

Boice, James Montgomery .

"God's Providence" .

New-Testament-Christian.com .

St. Catherine of Siena ; Dialogue 4, 13 "On Divine Providence": LH, Sunday, week 19, OR .

Flavel, John .

The Mystery of Providence .

ISBN 0-85151-104-X .

A Puritan classic on the subject.

"Providence, divine" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (online ed.).

Stanford University Press . 2022.

"Creation, Providence, and Miracle" .

ReasonableFaith.org .

Swedenborg, Emanuel.

"Divine Providence" .

TheisticScience.org .

Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Divine Providence" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Jewish material [ edit ] Maimonides on Divine providence Archived 3 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine – selected passages from Maimonides 's The Guide for the Perplexed .

Pinczower, Kenneth Ephraim (2019).

Divine Providence אין עוד מלבדו השגחה פרטית : Hashem's Intimate Involvement in our Daily Lives as Discussed by Chazal . Feldheim.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Providence .

Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Divine Providence NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐24bb9
Cached time: 20250814215027
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.690 seconds
Real time usage: 0.844 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3777/1000000
Revision size: 30513/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 93147/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6735/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 150357/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.480/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16520890/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  752.154      1 -total
 29.46%  221.608      1 Template:Reflist
 17.90%  134.614     17 Template:Cite_web
 13.60%  102.280     14 Template:Lang
 12.34%   92.802     18 Template:Cite_book
  8.89%   66.871      1 Template:Attributes_of_God
  8.56%   64.403      1 Template:Sidebar
  7.73%   58.170      1 Template:Short_description
  6.86%   51.567      1 Template:Authority_control
  4.88%   36.692      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:415601:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215027 and revision id 1304468970. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Divine_providence&oldid=1304468970 " Categories : Attributes of God in Christian theology Jewish philosophy Metaphysics of religion Philosophy of religion Religious terminology Divinity Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2024 Articles containing Old French (842-ca. 1400)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles with unsourced quotes Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 06:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Divine providence 36 languages Add topic

