Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Issues Toggle Issues subsection 1.1 Significance of transmission 1.2 Nature of detection 1.3 Cultural and political considerations 1.4 Information sharing 1.5 Signal comprehensibility and content 1.6 Relative technological capabilities 2 Adopted and proposed PDPs Toggle Adopted and proposed PDPs subsection 2.1 The Brookings Report 2.2 IAA SETI Declaration of Principles 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Post-detection policy 3 languages Français Nederlands Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Code of conduct A post-detection policy ( PDP ), also known as a post-detection protocol , is a set of structured rules, standards, guidelines, or actions that governmental or other organizational entities plan to follow for the "detection, analysis, verification, announcement, and response to" confirmed signals from extraterrestrial civilizations .

[ 1 ] Though no PDPs have been formally and openly adopted by any governmental entity, there is significant work being done by scientists and nongovernmental organizations to develop cohesive plans of action to utilize in the event of detection. The most popular and well known of these is the "Declaration of Principles Concerning Activities Following the Detection of Extraterrestrial Intelligence", which was developed by the International Academy of Astronautics (IAA), with the support of the International Institute of Space Law.

[ 2 ] The theories of PDPs constitute a distinct area of research but draw heavily from the fields of SETI (the Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence) , METI (Messaging to Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence) , and CETI (Communication with Extraterrestrial Intelligence) .

Scientist Zbigniew Paptrotny has argued that the formulation of post-detection protocols can be guided by three factors: terrestrial society's readiness to accept the news of ET detection, how the news of detection is released, and the comprehensibility of the message in the signal.

[ 3 ] These three broad areas and their related subsidiaries comprise the bulk of the content and discourse surrounding PDPs.

Issues [ edit ] Significance of transmission [ edit ] There are two proposed scales for quantifying the significance of transmissions between Earth and potential extraterrestrial intelligence (ETI). The Rio scale , ranging from 0 to 10, was proposed in 2000 as a means of quantifying the significance of a SETI detection. The scale was designed by Iván Almár and Jill Tarter to help policy-makers formulate an initial judgment on a detection's potential consequences.

[ 4 ] The scale borrows heavily from the Torino Scale , which is used to categorize the hazard of impact of near-earth objects (NEOs). The IAA SETI Permanent Study Group officially adopted this scale both as a means of bringing perspective to claims of ETI detection and as an acknowledgement that even false ETI detections could have disastrous consequences, which should be mitigated.

[ 5 ] A closely related metric is the San Marino Scale for quantifying potential hazard of deliberate transmissions from Earth. While the Rio scale rests on the relatively well-accepted science of the search for extraterrestrial signals (SETI), the San Marino scale seeks to bring objectivity to the reciprocal enterprise – that of human civilization sending transmissions that could be found by extraterrestrial civilizations (METI).

[ 6 ] The San Marino Scale was first proposed in 2005 and was adopted by the IAA SETI Permanent Study Group in September 2007.

[ 7 ] Nature of detection [ edit ] Despite widespread belief, there is no empirical knowledge concerning extraterrestrial life forms and civilizations. The implications of a detection of extraterrestrial life would vary greatly depending on the nature of that life, its location, and how human society reacts. Because of this lack of certainty, PDPs consider a variety of scenarios and the appropriate reactions. The formulation of a cohesive plan for a response to the detection of ETI would involve the development of scenario-contingent strategies for managing the discovery and its consequences.

Some scenarios have received more attention than have others. For example, while a sizable amount of work has been done to predict the consequences of a radio telescope detection of ETI elsewhere in our galaxy, very little such effort has been used to identify the consequences of discovering single-celled life forms elsewhere in the Solar System . Confirmation of such fossilized or living organisms on a nearby planet or moon could still have profound effects on individuals’ world-views and raise many ethical and practical issues.

[ 8 ] Cultural and political considerations [ edit ] Main article: Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact Regardless of the nature of a confirmed detection, PDPs also place considerable emphasis on the range of likely reactions from different constituencies, including the press, various religious groups, political leaders, and the general public. The differences in reactions across the range of cultural and religious boundaries would be substantial. One possible strategy for development of more comprehensive PDPs is to undertake carefully planned cross-cultural polls and other empirical studies based on analogues in the humanities and history , the social and behavioral sciences , and even science fiction to determine likely reactions. Shortly after a confirmed detection, the timely application of relevant interdisciplinary data is likely to prove invaluable in implementing the appropriate policy as well as in the delivery of educational and public relations initiatives particular to the situation at hand.

[ 9 ] Another potential strategy is to explore the capacity of religion as a "resource to absorb the impact of discovery and to maintain beneficial relations with ETI." [ 10 ] PDPs also attempt to take into account the political aftermath of a detection and the ways in which both governmental and nongovernmental entities might use information. As Michael Michaud states, "We cannot assume that SETI is immune from the ancient motivations of egoism, power, and greed. Decisions that could affect the welfare of the human species might be made by small, non-representative elites." [ 4 ] Once detection becomes public, decision-makers would exert influence by the way they evaluate the importance and handle the publicity of the discovery. It is possible that such actors would emphasize or minimize its importance to extract political advantage. The contact could be framed as a positive development that will benefit the nation and humankind. Likewise, it could be used to warn of potential dangers and provoke public anxieties. Each course of action would have profound effects on how the press and the general public react. Michaud posits that the more decipherable the information received from contact with ETI, the higher a chance there is for political reaction against alien cultural influences.

Extremist groups , both religious and secular, could weigh in, attacking information from ETI as evil or immoral. It is possible that this would spark attempts to terminate communication by interfering with the signal or targeting the detecting technology with attacks.

Albert Harrison has written that it would be "foolish and negligent" to fail to anticipate such reactions in the formulation of policies and plans.

[ 11 ] Information sharing [ edit ] Following a confirmed detection, another important variable considered in a PDP is the speed with which the facts of the discovery would become public knowledge. For instance, should a signal of ET origin be sufficiently ambiguous or otherwise difficult to interpret, the detecting party may perceive a need to withhold information about the discovery to prevent unintended reactions from the general public or other political entities. Likewise, the detecting party could choose to limit information release in a bid to exploit the contact for personal gain.

At the international level, the PDP of a national government entity would have the force of law to prevent, delay, or limit the release of information – especially if the detection is made by persons working for that agency or under government contract . This sort of information restriction scenario is more likely under circumstances in which the detecting party was the only holder of the technological capabilities required to communicate. The subsequent disclosure of those decisions could provoke international distrust, encouraging other nations to act unilaterally in their communication with ETI.

[ 4 ] Signal comprehensibility and content [ edit ] Main article: Communication with Extraterrestrial Intelligence Depending on the nature of the first detection, policy- or decision-makers might have the opportunity to make a conscious decision about composing and sending a message. The ambiguity and content of signals sent both to and from Earth would have profound implications for what actions needed to be taken. A PDP that did not take signal comprehensibility into account would not be flexible enough to inform appropriate action. The area of SETI research known as CETI (Communication with Extraterrestrial Intelligence), is concerned with how humankind should carry out this communication and, to some extent, representation problems such as whether a response should be with one collective voice or if anyone with access to a transmitter should have the right to communicate.

The purpose and content of a response is also an issue that PDPs seek to make explicit. There is considerable disagreement as to how to effectively communicate meaning and intent across what would likely be formidable language barriers . The message would need to be crafted in such a way that its content and delivery were unambiguous to receivers that may not even use written or verbal communication. Several mathematic , pictorial , algorithmic , and "natural" language theories have been developed and applied to the problem of CETI. A specific purpose or goal of outgoing transmissions may be covered by a PDP as well. Several possible functions exist, including: a description of our species and planet, a request for information, and/or the proposition of some course of action. However, in the absence of an intergovernmental agreement or structures for building consensus on the subject, nations, groups, businesses and individuals are free to act autonomously . It is precisely because the process of sculpting a collective message would be slow and laborious (but intensely important), that most scientists recommend having a PDP with some prescribed action laid out before contact is made.

[ 4 ] Relative technological capabilities [ edit ] In considering post-detection courses of action, it is also useful to consider the relative technological capabilities both in relation to signal relay time and in relation to whether or not the ETI is thought to pose a militaristic threat. If the ETI in question is transmitting from outside the Solar System, there will be a significant lag in time between transmission and receipt by either party. The relative sophistication of the communication technology available to each party would play heavily into the feasibility of certain types and content of messaging. In a similar vein, the potential disparities in sophistication of weapons technology hold grave implications for how humankind should react to ETI. Due to the perceived risk of revealing the precise location of the Earth to alien civilizations, METI has been heavily criticized as irresponsible considering the lack of information available about any real or potential ETI threat. Even in the likely scenario that accurate locational coordinates of Earth were available, there is question as to whether humankind should reveal anything more about itself that could be a boon to hostile ETI. Notable among the critics of METI were the (late) British theoretical physicist Stephen Hawking and includes science fiction author David Brin .

Adopted and proposed PDPs [ edit ] The Brookings Report [ edit ] Main article: Brookings Report " Proposed Studies on the Implications of Peaceful Space Activities for Human Affairs ," often referred to as "the Brookings Report," was a 1960 report commissioned by NASA and created by the Brookings Institution in collaboration with NASA's Committee on Long-Range Studies. In a section titled, "The implications of a discovery of extraterrestrial life," the report considers possible post-detection scenarios and gives recommendations. Aimed at the political leadership that would be in a decision-making role immediately following a confirmed detection, it describes, among other things, the circumstances under which it may or may not be advisable to withhold such information from the public. The significance of this relatively small section of the report is a matter of controversy. As more of an analysis of fallout and pertinent considerations than an explicit PDP, the report does not specifically recommend a cover-up of evidence of extraterrestrial life. This possibility, however, is the context in which the Brookings report is often cited by ufologists and conspiracy theorists.

IAA SETI Declaration of Principles [ edit ] The IAA, in an attempt to draw up universal guidelines on the immediate steps to be taken by the group or individual that makes a discovery, drafted the "Declaration of Principles Concerning Activities Following the Detection of Extraterrestrial Intelligence".

[ 12 ] The document has been endorsed by six international professional space societies and also constitutes an informal agreement among most of those carrying out SETI.

[ 2 ] The declaration proposes a set of nine post-detection protocols, listed below.

International consultations should be initiated to consider the question of sending communications to extraterrestrial civilizations.

Consultations on whether a message should be sent, and its content, should take place within the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space of the United Nations and within other governmental and non-governmental organizations, and should accommodate participation by qualified, interested groups that can contribute constructively to these consultations.

These consultations should be open to participation by all interested States and should be intended to lead to recommendations reflecting a consensus.

The United Nations General Assembly should consider making the decision on whether or not to send a message to extraterrestrial intelligence, and on what the content of that message should be, based on recommendations from the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and from governmental and non-governmental organizations.

If a decision is made to send a message to extraterrestrial intelligence, it should be sent on behalf of all Humankind, rather than from individual States.

The content of such a message should reflect a careful concern for the broad interests and wellbeing of Humanity, and should be made available to the public in advance of transmission.

As the sending of a communication to extraterrestrial intelligence could lead to an exchange of communications separated by many years, consideration should be given to a long-term institutional framework for such communications.

No communication to extraterrestrial intelligence should be sent by any State until appropriate international consultations have taken place. States should not cooperate with attempts to communicate with extraterrestrial intelligence that do not conform to the principles of this Declaration.

In their deliberations on these questions, States participating in this Declaration and United Nations bodies should draw on the expertise of scientists, scholars, and other persons with relevant knowledge.

[ 13 ] The document does not carry the force of law or any other regulatory power.  Hence it can be ignored by public or private institutions should they choose to, without legal repercussions.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Human presence in space Global governance , international policy and/or cooperation for policies which are implemented in parallel and/or interdependently globally References [ edit ] ^ "SETI Protocols" .

SETI Permanent Study Group . International Academy of Astronautics. Archived from the original on 2012-01-14 . Retrieved 22 May 2012 .

^ a b Billingham, John et al. 1999. Social Implications of the Detection of an Extraterrestrial Civilization (SETI Press, Mountain View, CA).

^ Paprotny, Zbigniew (1990). "Signals from ETI detected — What next?".

Acta Astronautica .

21 (2): 93– 95.

Bibcode : 1987brig.iafcQ....P .

doi : 10.1016/0094-5765(90)90133-6 .

^ a b c d e Michaud, Michael A.G. (2003).

"Ten decisions that could shake the world" (PDF) .

Space Policy .

19 (2): 131– 136.

Bibcode : 2003SpPol..19..131M .

doi : 10.1016/S0265-9646(03)00019-5 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-06-12 . Retrieved 2024-04-28 .

^ IAA SETI Permanent Study Group: Rio Scale Archived 2002-06-20 at the Wayback Machine . Setileague.org (2006-09-29). Retrieved on 2011-04-09.

^ Almar, I; Paulshuch, H (2007). "The San Marino Scale: a new analytical tool for assessing transmission risk".

Acta Astronautica .

60 (1): 57– 59.

Bibcode : 2007AcAau..60...57A .

doi : 10.1016/j.actaastro.2006.04.012 .

^ IAA SETI Permanent Study Group: San Marino Scale Archived 2011-03-25 at the Wayback Machine . Setileague.org. Retrieved on 2011-04-09.

^ Dick, Steven K. “Response to the Discovery of Extraterrestrial Life.” (1999).

Workshop on the Societal Implications of Astrobiology: Final Report.

Ames Research Center: NASA Technical Memorandum (Final Report revised on January 20, 2001).

^ Vakoch, Douglas A. "Predicting Reactions to the Detection of Life beyond Earth." (1999). Workshop on the Societal Implications of Astrobiology: Final Report. Ames Research Center: NASA Technical Memorandum (Final Report revised on January 20, 2001).

^ Harrison, Albert A., and Kathleen Connell (Eds.) (1999).

Workshop on the Societal Implications of Astrobiology: Final Report Archived 2022-10-05 at the Wayback Machine . Ames Research Center: NASA Technical Memorandum (Final Report revised on January 20, 2001).

^ Albert A. Harrison, "Rethinking our Place in the Universe: Exploring the Societal Implications of NASA’s Astrobiology Program," Space Times, January–February 2002, 4–9, 6.

^ "Declaration of Principles Concerning Activities Following the Detection of Extraterrestrial Intelligence" Archived 2011-06-12 at the Wayback Machine ar setileague.org.

^ IAA SETI Permanent Study Group: Proposed SETI Reply Protocols Archived 2011-01-24 at the Wayback Machine . Setileague.org (2004-01-25). Retrieved on 2011-04-09.

v t e Politics of outer space Spacefaring nations Space policy Space traffic management Space debris management Space Debris Working Group Space Debris Committee Planetary protection principle Post-detection policy Asteroid impact Prediction Avoidance Spaceguard The Spaceguard Foundation Space races Cold War Space Race Sputnik crisis Timeline Billionaire space race Mars race Records Space propaganda Space competition Chinese space program Two Bombs, One Satellite doctrine (1966–1976) Shuguang program (1966–1972) Chinese ASAT program (1964–) 2007 test Project 921 (1992–) Shenzhou program Tiangong program Space station Chinese Lunar Exploration Program (2003–) Mars and beyond Planetary Exploration of China (2016–) MARS-500 study ESA Science Programme European Launcher Development Organisation (1960–1975) Europa launcher programme (1962–1973) European Space Research Organisation (1964–1975) European Space Agency (1975–) EU/ESA Space Council European Cooperation for Space Standardization European Space Research and Technology Centre Concurrent Design Facility European Astronaut Centre ESA Centre for Earth Observation Living Planet Programme European Centre for Space Applications and Telecommunications European Data Relay System Space Telescope European Coordinating Facility (1983–2010) European Space Astronomy Centre (2005–) European Space Security and Education Centre European Space Operations Centre ESTRACK network Guiana Space Centre Ariane launcher programme (1973–) Vega launcher programme (1998–) European Space Policy Institute Space Situational Awareness Programme Future Launchers Preparatory Programme Intermediate eXperimental Vehicle PRIDE Space Rider ESA Television Mars and beyond Mars Exploration Joint Initiative MARS-500 study Aurora programme ExoMars Horizon 2000 (1985–1995) SOHO Cassini–Huygens Huygens Cluster Cluster II XMM- Newton Rosetta INTEGRAL Herschel Planck Horizon 2000 Plus (1995–2015) ISS programme Politics Gaia LISA Pathfinder BepiColombo Cosmic Vision (2015–2025) Solar Orbiter Euclid ARIEL EnVision CHEOPS JUICE ATHENA LISA Comet Interceptor SMILE EU Space Programme Western European Union Satellite Centre (1992–2002) EU Satellite Centre (2002–) EU/ESA Space Council EU Commission DG Defence Industry and Space European GNSS Supervisory Authority (2004–2010) European GNSS Agency (2010–2021) EU Agency for the Space Programme (2021–) Galileo programme Copernicus programme EGNOS programme EUSST programme Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications European Union Aviation Safety Agency European Network of Civil Aviation Safety Investigation Authorities European Defence Agency Europe by Satellite Other European initiatives and bodies AeroSpace and Defence Industries Association of Europe Eurospace Eurocontrol Council of Europe Council of European Aerospace Societies European Broadcasting Union European Civil Aviation Conference European Committee for Standardization / European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications Administrations European Telecommunications Standards Institute European Organisation for Civil Aviation Equipment European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites European Patent Organisation European Patent Office European Telecommunications Satellite Organization European Southern Observatory Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Indian space policy Department of Space Indian Human Spaceflight Programme Space Activities Bill Indian ASAT programme Mission Shakti British space programme Creation of the British National Committee for Space Research (1958) Start of the Ariel programme (1962) Black Arrow launcher (1964–1971) Creation of the British National Space Centre (1985) Outer Space Act 1986 Project Juno (1991) Space Innovation and Growth Team (2009–2010) Creation of the UK Space Agency (2010) Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015 Space Industry Act 2018 UK Global Navigation Satellite System (2018–2020) 2021 Integrated Review Defence in a Competitive Age US space policy Truman space policy Operation Paperclip list of scientists Aerobee rocket program RAND Establishment of Cape Canaveral Eisenhower space policy WS-117L Project Vanguard Sputnik crisis Introduction to Outer Space 1958 NASA Act Space Act Agreement Cancellation of Man in Space Soonest Launch of Project Mercury Missile gap Launch of X-15 program Kennedy space policy Launch of the Mariner program Launch of the Gemini project Launch of the Apollo program " We choose to go to the Moon " Johnson space policy 1967 Outer Space Treaty Nixon space policy Moon landing Extra-Terrestrial Exposure Law Launch of the Space Shuttle Program Skylab Ford space policy Apollo–Soyuz Launch of the Viking program Carter space policy Reagan space policy Citizens' Advisory Council Strategy of Technology doctrine Strategic Defense Initiative Space Station Freedom proposal 1984 Space Act 1985 anti-satellite missile test Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Rogers Report Ride Report George H. W. Bush space policy Space Exploration Initiative 1990 Augustine Committee Hubble Space Telescope National Space Council Clinton space policy Faster, better, cheaper Gore–Chernomyrdin Commission ISS Shuttle–Mir program ISS programme Politics Launch of the Mars Exploration Program 1998 Space Act Decadal Planning Team Launch of the X-37 program George W. Bush space policy Aerospace Industry Commission 2002 National missile defense directive Space Shuttle Columbia disaster Vision for Space Exploration Aldridge Commission ESAS 2005 NASA Act Launch of the Constellation program Operation Burnt Frost Obama space policy 2009 Augustine Committee Kennedy Space Center speech Cancellation of the Constellation program Launch of the Space Launch System program Redesign of the Orion program Flexible path Mars Exploration Joint Initiative 2010 NASA Act Title 51 Space Shuttle retirement Development of the Commercial Crew Program 2014 NASA Act 2015 Space Act Trump space policy Re-establishment of the National Space Council Creation of the Space Force Launch of the Artemis program Launch of the Lunar Gateway project Executive Order 13959 China exclusion policy of NASA International Traffic in Arms Regulations Full-spectrum dominance doctrine Budget of NASA House Committee on Space NESDIS Office of Space Commerce FCC FAA/AST NRO IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Society Antennas & Propagation Society Broadcast Technology Society Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society Vehicular Technology Society USSR and Russia Soviet space program Stalin Operation Osoaviakhim (1946) list of scientists Khrushchev Sputnik program Sputnik crisis (1957) Vostok program (1960–1963) Fractional Orbital Bombardment System (1960–1982) Soviet crewed lunar programs (1961–1976) Voskhod program (1964–1966) Brezhnev Soyuz program (1967–) Interkosmos (1967–1991) Salyut program (1971–1986) Almaz (1973–1977) Buran program (1974–1993) Apollo–Soyuz (1975) Gorbachev Mir (1986–2001) Roscosmos Yeltsin Gore–Chernomyrdin Commission ISS (1993–) Shuttle–Mir program ISS programme Politics Medvedev Medvedev modernisation programme 2010 Military doctrine Putin United Rocket and Space Corporation (2013–2015) 2014 Military doctrine 2015 Creation of Roscosmos Mars MARS-500 study ExoMars Other policies Australian space program Brazilian space program Emirati space program Japanese space program Kazakh space program Kenyan space program Lebanese space program North Korean space program Pakistani space program Space programme 2040 Philippine space program South Korean space program Ugandan space initiatives International Space Station programme Politics of the International Space Station United Nations International Civil Aviation Organization ITU-R Office for Outer Space Affairs UN-SPIDER Space Generation Advisory Council Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space General Assembly Fourth Committee Other intergovernmental or inter-agency bodies African Space Agency Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems Committee on Earth Observation Satellites Committee on Space Research International Planetary Data Alliance International Cospas-Sarsat Programme Group on Earth Observations Global Standards Collaboration Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee International Charter 'Space and Major Disasters' International Mobile Satellite Organization International Space Exploration Coordination Group International Space Station Multilateral Coordination Board International Telecommunications Satellite Organization Intersputnik Orbital Debris Co-ordination Working Group Regional African Satellite Communication Organization Arab Satellite Communications Organization Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization Space law Partial Test Ban Treaty (1963) Outer Space Treaty (1967) Rescue Agreement (1968) Space Liability Convention (1972) US-USSR Cooperation Agreement (1972) Satellite Convention (1974) Registration Convention (1975) Bogota Declaration (1976) Moon Treaty (1979) Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space (1981) International Cospas-Sarsat Programme Agreement (1988) International Space Station Intergovernmental Agreement (1998) International Docking System Standard International Charter 'Space and Major Disasters' (1999) Cape Town Treaty, Space Assets protocol (2012) Artemis Accords (2020) Space jurisdiction Common heritage of mankind Extraterrestrial real estate Astronomical naming conventions ITU Radio Regulations CCSDS standards ODCWG standards CEOS standards COSPAR standards International Designator IPDA standards GSC standards GEO standards ISECG standards Various conventions, treaties, agreements, memorandums, charters or declarations establishing and governing intergovernmental organisations or inter-agency bodies dealing with space affairs Commercial use Space industry India Russia United Kingdom United States Private spaceflight Launch market competition Space tourism Space advertising Space technology Space-based economy Space trade Space manufacturing Lunar resources Project Harvest Moon Asteroid mining Militarisation Space forces, units and formations Space forces Australia Brazil Canada China Colombia France Germany Iran AJA IRGC Israel Japan Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Pakistan Russia South Korea Spain Thailand Turkey United Kingdom United States History Structure Vietnam Ranks and insignia Space commands France India Italy NATO NORAD United Kingdom United States Space warfare Space domain awareness Space weapon Anti-satellite weapon China India Russia United States Kinetic bombardment Kill vehicle Missile defense Military satellite Reconnaissance satellite Spaceplane Satellite jamming Space advocacy Air & Space Forces Association Alliance for Space Development National Space Society Space Frontier Foundation Mars Society Moon Society Students for the Exploration and Development of Space Arthur C. Clarke Institute for Modern Technologies British Interplanetary Society Coalition for Deep Space Exploration International Academy of Astronautics International Astronautical Federation International Astronomical Union Lunar Explorers Society Space Exploration Alliance Space Fellowship Space Force Association Space Foundation The Planetary Society v t e Public-sector space agencies Africa Pan-African and pan-Arab RASCOM Arabsat National ASAL EgSA NARSS ESSTI GSSTC KSA NASRDA SANSA Americas North America CSA NASA NESDIS OSC FAA/AST FCC USSF USSPACECOM NRO Latin America and the Caribbean ALCE AEM CONAE ABE AEB DCTA INPE ITA CCE ABAE IVIC Asia Pan-Asian APSCO Central Asia KazCosmos 1 Roscosmos 1 SRI VK TNSA 1 East Asia CNSA SASTIND CASC CALT CAST CCF CGWIC PLAASF CASIC JAXA ISAS JSS NICT NATA KASA KARI KASI SaTReC TASA South Asia SPARRSO ISRO 2 Antrix Corp DoS NRSC DSA SUPARCO Southeast Asia BRIN ORPA INASA MYSA PhilSA SSTL GISTDA VNSC West Asia ArmCosmos 1 MAKA 1 NSSA NEHSA ISA ISRC ISA NCSR SSA KACST-SRI SSA 2 GORS TUA TÜBİTAK UZAY UAESA ( MBRSC ) Europe Pan-European CEN / CENELEC CEPT ETSI Eurocontrol ECAC ESA ECSS ESTEC EAC ESRIN ECSAT ESAC ESOC ESTRACK Guiana Space Centre EUMETSAT EUTELSAT IGO ESO EU and EEA DG DEFIS EUSPA EU SatCen EASA BEREC ALR 2 BELSPO BIRA-IASB SRTI 2 CSO 2 DTU Space ESO 1 CNES 2 AAE CdE DLR 2 HSA HSO 2 ASI LSA LSO 1 SRON NSO NOSA POLSA 2 CBK PAN UKE KRRiT ORO ULC PTSPACE ROSA 2 INTA AEC EAE AEE SNSA Other ArmCosmos 1 MAKA 1 BSA 1 KazCosmos 1 Roscosmos 1 SRI VVKO SSO TUA TÜBİTAK UZAY SSAU 1 UKSA 2 Oceania ASA CSIRO NZSA World CCSDS CEOS COSPAR IPDA Cospas-Sarsat GEO GSC IADC ICSMD IMSO ISECG ISS MCB ITSO Intersputnik ODCWG ITU-R UNCOPUOS UNOOSA UNOSAT Former BNSC KCST LAPAN NAL NASDA SSP MOM Interkosmos See also: Timeline of first orbital launches by country 1 Preceded by the Soviet space program 2 Preceded by Interkosmos participation NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐stz8p
Cached time: 20250817162639
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.632 seconds
Real time usage: 0.822 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 12567/1000000
Revision size: 20592/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 358946/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15061/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 51/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 40601/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.258/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21049911/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  572.067      1 -total
 97.18%  555.913     12 Template:Navbox
 65.67%  375.678      1 Template:Politics_of_outer_space
 21.82%  124.840      1 Template:Public-sector_space_agencies
 18.69%  106.900      1 Template:Reflist
 17.62%  100.794    105 Template:Flag_decoration
 15.10%   86.372      2 Template:Lang
 14.10%   80.639     32 Template:Flag_icon
 11.41%   65.271      1 Template:Cite_web
 11.02%   63.062      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:31266686:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817162639 and revision id 1290491153. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Post-detection_policy&oldid=1290491153 " Category : Extraterrestrial life Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 May 2025, at 03:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Post-detection policy 3 languages Add topic

