Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Algorithms Toggle Algorithms subsection 1.1 Parity byte or parity word 1.2 Sum complement 1.3 Position-dependent 1.4 Fuzzy checksum 1.5 General considerations 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Checksum 37 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Íslenska Italiano עברית Latviešu Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Data used to detect errors in other data This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Checksum" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Effect of a typical checksum function (the Unix cksum utility) A checksum is a small-sized block of data derived from another block of digital data for the purpose of detecting errors that may have been introduced during its transmission or storage .  By themselves, checksums are often used to verify data integrity but are not relied upon to verify data authenticity .

[ 1 ] The procedure which generates this checksum is called a checksum function or checksum algorithm . Depending on its design goals, a good checksum algorithm usually outputs a significantly different value, even for small changes made to the input.

[ 2 ] This is especially true of cryptographic hash functions , which may be used to detect many data corruption errors and verify overall data integrity ; if the computed checksum for the current data input matches the stored value of a previously computed checksum, there is a very high probability the data has not been accidentally altered or corrupted.

Checksum functions are related to hash functions , fingerprints , randomization functions , and cryptographic hash functions .  However, each of those concepts has different applications and therefore different design goals. For instance, a function returning the start of a string can provide a hash appropriate for some applications but will never be a suitable checksum. Checksums are used as cryptographic primitives in larger authentication algorithms. For cryptographic systems with these two specific design goals [ clarification needed ] , see HMAC .

Check digits and parity bits are special cases of checksums, appropriate for small blocks of data (such as Social Security numbers , bank account numbers, computer words , single bytes , etc.).  Some error-correcting codes are based on special checksums which not only detect common errors but also allow the original data to be recovered in certain cases.

Algorithms [ edit ] Parity byte or parity word [ edit ] The simplest checksum algorithm is the so-called longitudinal parity check , which breaks the data into "words" with a fixed number n of bits, and then computes the bitwise exclusive or (XOR) of all those words.  The result is appended to the message as an extra word. In simpler terms, for n =1 this means adding a bit to the end of the data bits to guarantee that there is an even number of '1's. To check the integrity of a message, the receiver computes the bitwise exclusive or of all its words, including the checksum; if the result is not a word consisting of n zeros, the receiver knows a transmission error occurred.

[ 3 ] With this checksum, any transmission error which flips a single bit of the message, or an odd number of bits, will be detected as an incorrect checksum.  However, an error that affects two bits will not be detected if those bits lie at the same position in two distinct words.  Also swapping of two or more words will not be detected. If the affected bits are independently chosen at random, the probability of a two-bit error being undetected is 1/ n .

Sum complement [ edit ] A variant of the previous algorithm is to add all the "words" as unsigned binary numbers, discarding any overflow bits, and append the two's complement of the total as the checksum.  To validate a message, the receiver adds all the words in the same manner, including the checksum; if the result is not a word full of zeros, an error must have occurred.  This variant, too, detects any single-bit error, but the pro modular sum is used in SAE J1708 .

[ 4 ] Position-dependent [ edit ] The simple checksums described above fail to detect some common errors which affect many bits at once, such as changing the order of data words, or inserting or deleting words with all bits set to zero.  The checksum algorithms most used in practice, such as Fletcher's checksum , Adler-32 , and cyclic redundancy checks (CRCs), address these weaknesses by considering not only the value of each word but also its position in the sequence. This feature generally increases the cost of computing the checksum.

Fuzzy checksum [ edit ] The idea of fuzzy checksum was developed for detection of email spam by building up cooperative databases from multiple ISPs of email suspected to be spam.   The content of such spam may often vary in its details, which would render normal checksumming ineffective.  By contrast, a "fuzzy checksum" reduces the body text to its characteristic minimum, then generates a checksum in the usual manner. This greatly increases the chances of slightly different spam emails producing the same checksum.  The ISP spam detection software, such as SpamAssassin , of co-operating ISPs, submits checksums of all emails to the centralised service such as DCC .  If the count of a submitted fuzzy checksum exceeds a certain threshold, the database notes that this probably indicates spam.  ISP service users similarly generate a fuzzy checksum on each of their emails and request the service for a spam likelihood.

[ 5 ] General considerations [ edit ] A message that is m bits long can be viewed as a corner of the m -dimensional hypercube . The effect of a checksum algorithm that yields an n -bit checksum is to map each m -bit message to a corner of a larger hypercube, with dimension m + n . The 2 m + n corners of this hypercube represent all possible received messages. The valid received messages (those that have the correct checksum) comprise a smaller set, with only 2 m corners.

A single-bit transmission error then corresponds to a displacement from a valid corner (the correct message and checksum) to one of the m adjacent corners.  An error which affects k bits moves the message to a corner which is k steps removed from its correct corner.  The goal of a good checksum algorithm is to spread the valid corners as far from each other as possible, to increase the likelihood "typical" transmission errors will end up in an invalid corner.

See also [ edit ] General topic Algorithm Check digit Damm algorithm Data rot File verification Fletcher's checksum Frame check sequence cksum md5sum sha1sum Parchive Sum (Unix) SYSV checksum BSD checksum xxHash Error correction Hamming code Reed–Solomon error correction IPv4 header checksum Hash functions List of hash functions Luhn algorithm Parity bit Rolling checksum Verhoeff algorithm File systems Bcachefs , Btrfs , ReFS and ZFS – file systems that perform automatic file integrity checking using checksums Related concepts Isopsephy Gematria File fixity References [ edit ] ^ "Definition of CHECKSUM" .

Merriam-Webster .

Archived from the original on 2022-03-10 . Retrieved 2022-03-10 .

^ Hoffman, Chris (30 September 2019).

"What Is a Checksum (and Why Should You Care)?" .

How-To Geek .

Archived from the original on 2022-03-09 . Retrieved 2022-03-10 .

^ Fairhurst, Gorry (2014).

"Checksums & Integrity Checks" .

Archived from the original on April 8, 2022 . Retrieved March 11, 2022 .

^ "SAE J1708" . Kvaser.com. Archived from the original on 11 December 2013.

^ "IXhash" . Apache.

Archived from the original on 31 August 2020 . Retrieved 7 January 2020 .

Further reading [ edit ] Koopman, Philip; Driscoll, Kevin; Hall, Brendan (March 2015).

"Cyclic Redundancy Code and Checksum Algorithms to Ensure Critical Data Integrity" (PDF) . Federal Aviation Administration. DOT/FAA/TC-14/49.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2015-05-18.

Koopman, Philip (2023). "Large-Block Modular Addition Checksum Algorithms".

arXiv : 2302.13432 [ cs.DS ].

External links [ edit ] The Wikibook Algorithm Implementation has a page on the topic of: Checksums Additive Checksums (C) theory from Barr Group Practical Application of Cryptographic Checksums * A4 * US-Letter * US-Letter two-column Checksum Calculator Open source python based application with GUI used to verify downloads.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Checksum&oldid=1295569637 " Category : Checksum algorithms Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2024 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2023 This page was last edited on 14 June 2025, at 15:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Checksum 37 languages Add topic

