Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Population Distribution Toggle Population Distribution subsection 2.1 Language 3 Social Status Toggle Social Status subsection 3.1 Employment 3.2 Youth 4 Notable people 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Congolese Australians Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ethnic group Congolese Australians Total population 5,522 (by birth, 2016) [ 1 ] Regions with significant populations Congolese-born people by state or territory Queensland 1,183 Victoria 736 Western Australia 711 South Australia 678 Languages French · English · Swahili [ 2 ] Religion Christianity Related ethnic groups African Australians , Central African Australians , South Sudanese Australians , Ugandan Australians , Rwandan Australians , Burundian Australians , Tanzanian Australians , Zambian Australians , Angolan Australians , Cameroonian Australians , Gabonese Australians Congolese Australians are a people who were either born in the Democratic Republic of the Congo or the Republic of the Congo , or are of Congolese heritage, who have since settled in Australia . The Congolese Australian population has seen a marked increase since the end of the 20th century, growing from 21 individuals in 1996, to 5,522 by the 2016 Census . The influx of Congolese immigrants in the 1990s were initially the result of the First Congo War , a civil war in the country of Zaire (present-day Democratic Republic of the Congo), as well as the effects of the Rwandan genocide on the eastern border of the country, which created rebel militia groups, completely destabilizing state authority at the time.

[ 3 ] According to the 2016 Census, approximately 80% (3,228) of all Congolese-born Australians arrived in Australia between 2006 and 2016, [ 4 ] this sudden increase in Congolese immigration was the result of a conflict between the Democratic Republic of the Congo's conflict against the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda , an ongoing conflict beginning in 2004. The Congolese Australian population have settled evenly across the country's states and territories, with the largest populations being located in Queensland , Western Australia , and Victoria . Like most African Australians, it is not uncommon for Congolese Australians to experience racism, and research on their experience has been ongoing following their arrival in the early 2000s.

History [ edit ] The Congo attained independence from Belgium in 1960, however the Belgian preparation of the Congo for this was hasty, and therefore there was not sufficient infrastructure for a new Congolese government to effectively function, [ 3 ] and as a result, the 1960s and 1970s saw a couple of internal conflicts.

These internal tensions, resulting from resistance to the rule of the current President Mobutu Sese Seko , existing tensions between existing ethnic groups, and the Rwandan genocide forcing 1.5 million Hutu and Tutsi people to seek refuge in the Congo in 1994 [ 3 ] were the causes of the First Congo War, lasting from October 1996 – May 1997, and caused hundreds of thousands of deaths, both of combatants and civilian groups.

[ 5 ] The government installed after the war by the AFDL (consisting of Rwanda , Uganda , Burundi , Angola , SPLA , and Eritrean aggressors) faced the same issues as Mobutu's administration, and therefore caused the outbreak of the Second Congo War . The 1990s and 2000s saw continuing conflicts, and thereby caused the exodus of 300,000 Congolese people into neighboring countries.

[ 6 ] Most Congolese people who have arrived in Australia since 2004, have immigrated through the Australian Government's Humanitarian Program.

[ 6 ] The 2016 Census records that Congolese immigration to Australia prior to 2001 was very small, [ 7 ] however, 38.9% (1,596 people) of the Congolese-born Australian population arrived between 2006 and 2010, and an even greater proportion, equaling 39.8% (1,632) arrived between 2011 and 2016, showing a clear increasing trend in the immigration of Congolese nationals to Australia Population Distribution [ edit ] Australia's Congolese population has distributed across all the states of Australia since their arrival, the largest concentration of Congolese Australians are located in Queensland, with 1,183 people as of 2016.

[ 8 ] Victoria, Western Australia and South Australia also have large populations, all over 600 Congolese born people, smaller states and territories; the Northern Territory , Tasmania and the ACT , have a small population. Further, despite being one of the more populous states, New South Wales has a comparatively small Congolese population, [ 8 ] with only 550 individuals stating they were born in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Language [ edit ] In terms of languages, the Congolese Australian community is for the most part, heterogenous; English , French , Lingala , Nyanga and Swahili are the most commonly spoken languages by people who have arrived from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, [ 9 ] there is also a wide variation of dialects in their Swahili, leading to difficulty in interpreting and translating; Congolese Swahili, by comparison to Standard Swahili, uses more words with an etymology similar to Bantu , than Arabic . Other official languages of the Democratic Republic of the Congo that may be spoken by Congolese Australians are Kongo and Tshiluba .

Swahili is the most commonly reported first language for those born in the DRC (53%) and the Republic of Congo (36%), followed by French, 17% of DRC arrivals and 29% for the Republic of Congo.

[ 9 ] According to the 2016 Census, 8.2% of Congolese-born Australians speak English as their sole language, whereas 72.2% of the population are both proficient at English and other languages, with only 18.1% can speak other languages but cannot speak English well.

[ 8 ] The wide variety of languages spoken by Congolese-born Australians, including minority languages such as Lingala, means that the Census omits some instances of multilingualism, this can mean that these minority languages may not be reported in the Census.

[ 9 ] The underreporting of speakers of these languages means that appropriate resources have not been allocated to having interpreters for those languages.

Social Status [ edit ] Racism against Congolese Australians, similarly to all African-Australian groups, is not uncommon, [ 10 ] with African Australians feeling as though they are criminalized and scrutinized due to their skin colour, [ 10 ] even rejected by the society they are seeking to participate in due to the prejudices of members of the population.

[ 10 ] Given that most Congolese Australians are fleeing from conflict in their home country, they simultaneously are removed from the country they fled, but also due to this racialization, lack a feeling of belonging.

[ 10 ] Access to healthcare is another element of Australian resettlement that has barriers affecting Congolese-born refugees, of these, the commonly reported barriers are the differences between the Australian and Congolese health system, the complexity of the Australian healthcare system and communication issues.

[ 11 ] The main difference between the two systems is the ease of purchasing medication in Africa when compared with Australia; purchasing necessary medications in Africa did not require a prescription, including antibiotics, [ 11 ] unlike Australia where diagnosis and prescription of medicine by a professional is usually required before being allowed to purchase more serious medicines. The Australian pharmacy system can also be a barrier, with the combination of generic and brand names for medicines, requiring multiple medicines for newly diagnosed conditions and prescriptions, none of which are present in the Congolese system.

[ 11 ] The language barrier is a common problem also, and can make the previous issues more severe, many feel that their English is not adequate to describe their symptoms to a GP or a pharmacist, and made it difficult for healthcare professionals to communicate with their patients.

Employment [ edit ] Employment is often used as an indicator for assessing the successful integration of migrants into their new host country [ 12 ] for purposes of acculturation, as well as being able to provide for any family members who have migrated with them.

[ 12 ] Demographic factors are associated with successful employment applications for Congolese Australians; gender, age, English proficiency and how long the applicant has been living in Australia. Male migrants between the ages of 25 and 44 with strong English skills were far more likely to find employment than others, [ 12 ] as for length of stay in the host country, the longer the time spent and the greater their understanding of Australian cultural practices, the greater their odds of finding employment. The difficulty in attaining employment status due to these barriers can induce stress in some applicants when compounded with the preexisting stress of needing to adjust living in a new country.

[ 12 ] Youth [ edit ] Proficiency in English, particularly ability to speak it fluently, is a key factor for successful resettlement of African youths in Australia, [ 13 ] youths that were proficient have found settling into Australian culture faster and smoother. The lack of recognition by Australian schools for previous schooling is an existing issue for African youths settling, seeing as older students may not be able to complete their schooling and may be required to attend adult education centers.

[ 13 ] Having proficiency in the English language is also a barrier for youths seeking to access medical treatment, African Australian youths have a high degree of mental health issues, namely Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) due to the trauma of enforced separation from their home country and potentially even family members.

Finding employment is a challenge for refugee youths from the DRC, given that most job listings in Australia are placed online, refugees who are not familiar with the technologies required to apply for these jobs face additional barriers.

[ 13 ] Congolese-born refugee youths socialize within their community; playing sports with other Congolese people, or engaging through functions hosted by their local church.

[ 13 ] Most Congolese-born youths are Christian in belief; oftentimes attending church multiple times in a week, and also serves a social role in the lives of the youths.

[ 13 ] Financial support is offered to Congolese Australian refugees through welfare, however financial difficulties are still a serious issue, along with the availability of housing.

[ 13 ] Notable people [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( August 2023 ) Future D. Fidel , playwright See also [ edit ] Australia portal Democratic Republic of the Congo portal Republic of the Congo portal African Australians Congolese Americans References [ edit ] ^ Australian Bureau of Statistics 2016, Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census 2016 - Cultural Diversity 'Table 1: Country of Birth of Person by State and Territory of Usual Residence' data cube: Excel spreadsheet, cat no. 2071.0, viewed 6 April 2018, http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/DetailsPage/2071.02016?OpenDocument ^ "The Democratic Republic of Congo-born Community | Department of Social Services, Australian Government" . Archived from the original on 9 April 2018 . Retrieved 9 April 2018 .

^ a b c Abbot., Peter (2014).

Modern African wars . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 9781782000761 .

^ "2016 QuickStats Country of Birth" .

quickstats.censusdata.abs.gov.au . Retrieved 4 January 2022 .

^ Prunier, Gérard (2009).

Africa's world war : Congo, the Rwandan genocide, and the making of a continental catastrophe . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-537420-9 .

OCLC 227574034 .

^ a b "Congo, Democratic Republic of the" .

Australian Government Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade . Retrieved 4 January 2022 .

^ "2016 QuickStats Country of Birth" .

quickstats.censusdata.abs.gov.au . Retrieved 4 January 2022 .

^ a b c "2016 QuickStats Country of Birth" .

quickstats.censusdata.abs.gov.au . Retrieved 4 January 2022 .

^ a b c Burke, Jean (30 October 2015).

"Linguistic complexity and diversity amongst Congolese diaspora in Australia: implications for languages services" (PDF) . Australian Catholic University.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 January 2022.

^ a b c d Gatwiri, Kathomi.

"Growing Up African in Australia: racism, resilience and the right to belong" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 4 January 2022 .

^ a b c Bellamy, Kim; Ostini, Remo; Martini, Nataly; Kairuz, Therese (12 September 2017).

"Perspectives of resettled African refugees on accessing medicines and pharmacy services in Queensland, Australia" .

International Journal of Pharmacy Practice .

25 (5): 358– 364.

doi : 10.1111/ijpp.12324 .

ISSN 0961-7671 .

PMID 27896894 .

S2CID 23663734 .

^ a b c d Khawaja, Nigar G.; Hebbani, Aparna; Gallois, Cindy; Mackinnon, Mairead (1 October 2019).

"Predictors of employment status: A study of former refugee communities in Australia" .

Australian Psychologist .

54 (5): 427– 437.

doi : 10.1111/ap.12388 .

ISSN 0005-0067 .

S2CID 150534077 .

^ a b c d e f Earnest, Jaya; Mansi, Ruth; Bayati, Sara; Earnest, Joel Anthony; Thompson, Sandra C (December 2015).

"Resettlement experiences and resilience in refugee youth in Perth, Western Australia" .

BMC Research Notes .

8 (1): 236.

doi : 10.1186/s13104-015-1208-7 .

ISSN 1756-0500 .

PMC 4467668 .

PMID 26054946 .

v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 v t e African diaspora Geography Americas / Latin America Caribbean Anguilla Antigua and Barbuda Aruba Bahamas Barbados Bermuda Cayman Islands Cuba Afro-Roma Arará Cape Verdean Ganga-Longoba Curaçao Dominica Dominican Republic Cocolo Samaná Americans Grenada Haiti Marabou Marron Jamaica Afro-Roma Coromantee Igbos Jamaican Maroons Puerto Rico Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Garifuna Trinidad and Tobago Douglas Merikins Turks and Caicos Islands Central America Belize Garifuna Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Miskito people Miskito Sambu Nicaragua Panama Cimarrón North America Canada Black Mennonites Indigenous Black Canadians New Brunswick Nova Scotia Ontario African immigrants Mexico Mascogos United States African Americans Afro-Roma Affrilachians African-American Jews Alabama Creoles Black Mennonites Black Southerners Black Hispanic Black Indians / Freedmen Cherokee freedmen Chickasaw freedmen Choctaw freedmen Creek freedmen Seminole freedmen Creoles of color Gullah Brass Ankles Chestnut Ridge people Dominickers Fulani Garifuna Igbos Louisiana Redbones Lumbee Melungeons Somali Bantus Yoruba African immigrants South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Kalungas Macombo Quilombola Chile Colombia Raizal Ecuador French Guiana Aluku Ndyuka Saramaka Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Kwinti Matawai Ndyuka Paramaccan Saramaka Uruguay Venezuela Europe ( Blacks ) Abkhazia Austria Belgium Finland France Paris Germany Greece Blacks Ireland Italy Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom Cambridge Liverpool London Scotland Wales Middle East Iran Iraq Israel Ethiopian Israelis Sudanese refugees Jordan Oman Palestine Saudi Arabia Syria Turkey Africans United Arab Emirates Yemen Asia and Oceania Australia China Guangzhou Hong Kong Afro-Asians in South Asia India and Pakistan Siddi in Karnataka Indonesia Black Dutchmen Mardijker Japan Malaysia New Zealand Sri Lanka Kaffirs Atlantic Saint Helena Secondary Afro-American diaspora Africa Ghana African Americans Tabom Liberia Americo-Liberians Nigeria Afro-Brazilians Saro Sierra Leone Sierra Leone Creole Europe France African Americans Haitians United Kingdom African Americans Afro-Caribbean people British Jamaicans Asia and Oceania Israel African Hebrew Israelites Japan Related topics African diaspora religions Anti-African sentiment Anti-Black racism Atlantic slave trade Coromantee Igbo Kongo Tikar Yoruba Slavery in the Ottoman Empire Black Lives Matter Black power Civil rights movement Creole peoples Genetic history Maroons Pan-Africanism Slavery Reparations Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Congolese_Australians&oldid=1301038982 " Categories : Ethnic groups in Australia African diaspora in Australia Australian people of Democratic Republic of the Congo descent People of African descent Hidden categories: Use Australian English from January 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from January 2018 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Articles to be expanded from August 2023 All articles to be expanded This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 19:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Congolese Australians Add languages Add topic

