Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 In New South Wales 1.2 In Victoria 1.3 In Western Australia 2 Portuguese Australians 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Portuguese Australians 1 language Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ethnic group Portuguese Australians Luso-australianos Total population 61,885 (2016) [ 1 ] Regions with significant populations Sydney , Perth , Melbourne , Adelaide , Canberra Languages Australian English Portuguese Portuguese Creole Religion Roman Catholicism (Majority) Protestantism Judaism (Minority) Related ethnic groups Portuguese Portuguese New Zealanders Portuguese Canadians Portuguese Brazilians Portuguese Americans Portuguese Argentine Portuguese Australians refers to Australians of Portuguese descent or Portuguese-born people living in Australia.

Despite their rather modest number compared to the Greek and Italian communities, Portuguese Australians form a very organised, self-conscious and active community in many fields of Australian life. With a population spread over many parts of the continent, sporting teams , social clubs, [ 2 ] radio shows, [ 3 ] newspapers, [ 4 ] outdoor cultural festivals, [ 5 ] culinary feasts, and even a traditional ethnic neighbourhood , the ever-growing Portuguese Australians form roughly 0.26% of Australia's population in 2016. The biggest Portuguese Australian community is in Petersham , Sydney: but there are other communities around Australia such as Melbourne , [ 6 ] Wollongong , Newcastle and Perth .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] There are also communities present, to a lesser extent, in Brisbane , [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Adelaide and Darwin .

[ 11 ] At the time of the 2016 census, there were 61,885 Portuguese migrants and Australians with Portuguese heritage living in Australia.

[ 1 ] Portuguese cuisine has also made its way into mainstream Australian society, with the fast expansion and establishment of restaurant and fast food outlets such as " Nando's ", " Oporto " and " Ogalo " to confirm its success. The Portuguese " pastel de nata " is a very popular delicacy in Australia and is commonly found throughout the country.

One of the most high-visibility moments for the Portuguese community was in 2005, when António Milhinhos, a shopkeeper from Darwin , was awarded the Senior Australian of the Year Award for his outstanding charity works and continuous catastrophe relief since 1983.

[ 12 ] History [ edit ] In New South Wales [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( January 2018 ) A wave of post-war immigrants migrated from Europe to Sydney, in particular the Portuguese, who settled in the inner-city areas of Petersham (sometimes considered Australia's largest Portuguese enclave) and Surry Hills .

In Victoria [ edit ] Portugal’s links with Australia may extend as far back as the sixteenth century, predating Captain Cook's voyage to Australia by 250 years. Some evidence suggests that Portuguese explorers were the first Europeans to visit Australia.

Three hundred years later, a few Portuguese were among the earliest settlers in Australia. Emanuel and Ana Serrão and their infant daughter arrived in Sydney in 1824, and moved to Warrnambool with their family in 1852. Few followed, and by 1901 only 86 Victorians were Portugal-born. Males made up 90% of the community.

The Portugal-born population in Victoria declined in the early twentieth century, and by 1933, only 12 were recorded in the census.

While the post-war migration boom had little effect on the Portuguese population of Victoria, the late 1960s saw the beginning of a dramatic increase in immigration. After the Portuguese colonial wars in Angola and Mozambique ended in 1974, and the former Portuguese colony of East Timor was invaded by Indonesian troops in 1975, more ethnic Portuguese immigrants settled in Victoria. The number of immigrants from Portugal also increased, from 131 in 1966 to 2,335 in 1986.

By 2016, 2,727 Portugal-born migrants were living in Victoria. The Portuguese community in Victoria today also includes people from the former Portuguese colonies of Macau , East Timor , Cape Verde , Mozambique , Angola , Goa and Brazil .

Members of the Portugal-born community today are predominantly employed as tradespeople and workers within the manufacturing and construction industries. Almost three-quarters still speak Portuguese at home.

The community is supported by organizations including the Portuguese Community Council of Australia, which serves as an umbrella organization for all Portuguese people in Australia. Portuguese language radio programs, language classes and sporting clubs help maintain the community in Victoria. Events such as performances by Madeira Folk Dancing provide an opportunity for the wider community to appreciate the rich, vibrant Portuguese culture.

[ 13 ] In Western Australia [ edit ] Portuguese migrants from the islands of Madeira settled in Fremantle in Western Australia in the 1950s and established a fishing community which, by the mid-1980s, had grown to about 6,000 people, including their descendants.

[ 14 ] Since then, Perth and Western Australia in general have been a frequent destination for Portuguese students and skilled labor, and although no mass-migration has occurred, the Portuguese population is still prevalent in the state. John Da Silva, the founder and owner of Bell-Vista vegetables, one of Western Australia's biggest vegetable provider migrated to Fremantle in the Portuguese migrant wave to that area in the 1960s.

[ 15 ] Portuguese Australians [ edit ] Further information: Category:Australian people of Portuguese descent Name Birth and Death Occupation Notes Isaac de Gois 1984– Rugby league player Portuguese descent Diogo Ferreira 1989– Football (soccer) player Portuguese descent Jessica Gomes 1985– Model Portuguese descent [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Moisés Henriques 1987– Cricket player Portuguese-born, Portuguese descent Stephanie Jacobsen 1980– Actress Portuguese descent [ 20 ] Charles Kingston 1850–1908 Politician Portuguese descent Maria Korp 1955-2005 Murder victim Portuguese descent Madison de Rozario 1993– Paralympic athlete Portuguese descent Nicole da Silva 1981– Actress Portuguese descent Daniel De Silva 1997- Footballer Portuguese descent Guy Sebastian 1981 - Singer Portuguese descent Joel Adams (Né Gonçalves) 1996 - Singer Portuguese descent James Sorensen 1986 - Model/Actor Portuguese descent Naomi Sequeira 1994 - Actress/ Singer Portuguese descent Kate DeAraugo 1985 - Singer Portuguese descent David Malouf 1934 - Writer Portuguese-jewish descent Lisa De Vanna 1984 - Footballer Portuguese descent Junie Morosi 1933 - Businesswoman Portuguese descent Josh Mansour 1990 - Rugby league player Portuguese descent Jonathan Guerreiro 1991 - Ice dancer Portuguese descent Sophie Masson 1959 - Writer Portuguese descent Priya Serrao 1992 - Miss Universe Australia 2019 Portuguese descent Wilson Da Silva ?

Science journalist, writer Brazilian-born, Portuguese descent Irina Dunn 1948 - Politician Portuguese descent Andrew Coelho 1987 - Tennis player Portuguese descent Danny Fulalo 1994 - Rugby league player Portuguese descent Corey Gameiro 1993 - Footballer Portuguese descent Ian Goodenough 1975 - Politician Portuguese descent Diana da Costa Neves 1987 - Basketball player.

Portuguese descent David Pereira 1953 - Classical cellist Portuguese descent Paulo Retre 1993 - Footballer Portuguese descent Lyndsey Rodrigues 1981 - TV host, actress Portuguese descent Chris Sebastian 1988 - Singer/Songwriter Portuguese descent Ivo Dos Santos 1985 - Olympic judoka Portuguese-born, Portuguese descent R. A. de Castro Basto 1898-1980 Doctor Portuguese descent See also [ edit ] Brazilian Australians European Australians Europeans in Oceania Immigration to Australia Petersham, New South Wales Portuguese in France Portuguese New Zealanders Portuguese in the United Kingdom Portuguese people Portuguese in Asia and Oceania Theory of the Portuguese discovery of Australia References [ edit ] ^ a b "2071.0 Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 - Cultural Diversity" . Australian Bureau of Statistics . Retrieved 14 February 2022 .

^ " List of numerous Portuguese Social Clubs and institutions based in Australia (Portuguese) " ^ " SBS Radio – Portuguese Archived 2009-06-24 at the Wayback Machine " ^ " Portuguese Consulate – New South Wales " ^ " Portuguese Festival at Petersham, Sydney – Youtube " ^ " Portuguese Association of Victoria Archived 2009-10-13 at the Wayback Machine " ^ " Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade – Australian Government Archived 14 October 2010 at the Wayback Machine " ^ " Portuguese Consulate – Western Australia Archived 13 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine " ^ " The Brisbane Portuguese Family Center (Portuguese) Archived 2008-01-20 at the Wayback Machine " ^ " The Brisbane Portuguese Family Center (Portuguese) Archived 2008-04-12 at the Wayback Machine " ^ " Department of the Chief Minister, Northern Territory – Australian Government Archived 2009-05-15 at the Wayback Machine " (PDF) ^ " Australian of the Year Awards Archived 2009-07-05 at the Wayback Machine " ^ " Immigration History from Portugal to Victoria Archived 27 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine " ^ " Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade – Australian Government Archived 14 October 2010 at the Wayback Machine " ^ " Bell-Vista Fruit and Vegetables " ^ "#IAm Jessica Gomes Story" .

Archived from the original on 21 December 2021 . Retrieved 16 March 2016 – via YouTube.

^ Cullum, Paul.

"Jessica Gomes: A Beauty Below the Surface" .

Ocean Drive . Retrieved 16 March 2016 .

^ "Jessica Gomes is in step – Korean dance star spot" .

The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 16 March 2016 .

^ Hellard, Peta (10 September 2005).

"Tomboy walks tall" .

Sunday Times . Perth Now. Archived from the original on 29 September 2008 . Retrieved 16 March 2016 .

^ "An exclusive INTERVIEW with STEPHANIE JACOBSEN, the star of "Razor"!" .

tv.com . Retrieved 16 March 2016 .

External links [ edit ] Consulate General of Portugal, Sydney v t e Portuguese diaspora Africa ( Luso-Africans ) Angola Guinea-Bissau Mozambique South Africa Americas Argentina Brazil Pardos Canada Colombia Guyana Mexico Peru Suriname Trinidad and Tobago United States Hawaii New Jersey Uruguay Venezuela Asia ( Luso-Asians ) India Jews Indonesia Indo Mardijker Macau Malaysia Pakistan Singapore Kristang Sri Lanka Burghers Mestiços Middle East Israel Turkey Europe Albania Austria Belgium Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Iceland Liechtenstein Luxembourg Netherlands Jews Norway Slovenia Sweden United Kingdom Jews Oceania Australia Hawaii New Zealand v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portuguese_Australians&oldid=1285839171 " Categories : European diaspora in Australia Australian people of Portuguese descent Portuguese diaspora in Australia Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Use dmy dates from February 2020 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters Articles to be expanded from January 2018 All articles to be expanded This page was last edited on 16 April 2025, at 03:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Portuguese Australians 1 language Add topic

