Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 France Toggle France subsection 1.1 Indicative planning 1.2 State ownership 2 India 3 Other economies with dirigiste characteristics 4 See also Toggle See also subsection 4.1 Economies with dirigisme or similar policies 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Dirigisme 18 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Español Français 한국어 Italiano Қазақша 日本語 Português Русский Shqip Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Economic doctrine in which the state plays a strong directory role Part of a series on Economic systems Major types Capitalism Socialism By ideology Associative Capitalist Corporate Democratic Laissez-faire Mercantilist Neo- Neoliberal Social market State Welfare Democratic Developmentalism Distributist Fascist Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgist Green Nationalist Protectionist Religious Buddhist economics Christian Sabbath economics Islamic Socialist Communist Market socialist Mutualist Participatory Socialist market Socialist-oriented market State Syndicalist Social credit Traditionalist Corporatist Feudalism By coordination Closed (autarky) Decentralized Digital Dirigist Dual Gift Informal Market Mixed Natural Open Planned Robinson Crusoe Sharing Subsistence Underground Vertical archipelago Virtual By regional model Asian East Asian Chinese Singaporean Keralan European Anglo-Saxon German Nordic Dutch Rhenish Soviet Latin America Socialism of the 21st century Sectors Common ownership Private Public Voluntary Property types Collective ownership Commons ( Common ownership ) Private property State ownership Social ownership Transition Collectivization Communization Corporatization Demutualization Deregulation Expropriation Financialization Liberalization Marketization Municipalization Mutualization Nationalization Privatization Socialization Marxist Coordination Barter Market Free Open Regulated Planning In kind Cybernetics Indicative Material balancing Price Self-managed Peer-to-peer Sharing Open access Other types Attention Commons-based peer production Expeditionary Hunter-gatherer Inclusive Democracy Information Manorialism Newly industrialized Palace Plantation Plutonomy Post-capitalist Post-industrial Post-scarcity Resource-based Token Traditional Transition World Business portal Economics portal v t e Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Dirigisme ( French: [diʁiʒism] ) or dirigism (from French diriger ' to direct ' ) is an economic doctrine in which the state plays a strong directive (policies) role, contrary to a merely regulatory or non-interventionist role, over a market economy .

[ 1 ] As an economic doctrine, dirigisme is the opposite of laissez-faire , stressing a positive role for state intervention in curbing productive inefficiencies and market failures . Dirigiste policies often include indicative planning , state-directed investment, and the use of market instruments (taxes and subsidies) to incentivize market entities to fulfill state economic objectives.

The term emerged in the post–World War II era to describe the economic policies of France which included substantial state-directed investment, the use of indicative economic planning to supplement the market mechanism and the establishment of state enterprises in strategic domestic sectors. It coincided with both the period of substantial economic and demographic growth, known as the Trente Glorieuses which followed the war, and the slowdown beginning with the 1973 oil crisis .

The term has subsequently been used to classify other economies that pursued similar policies, such as Canada , the Netherlands , Japan , the East Asian tiger economies of Hong Kong , Singapore , South Korea and Taiwan ; and more recently the economy of the People's Republic of China (PRC) after its economic reforms , [ 2 ] Malaysia , Indonesia [ 3 ] [ 4 ] and India before the opening of its economy in 1991.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Most modern economies can be characterized as dirigiste to some degree as the state may exercise directive action by performing or subsidizing research and development of new technologies through government procurement (especially military ) or through state-run research institutes.

[ 8 ] France [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( May 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Conservatism in France Ideologies Bonapartism Christian democracy Gaullism Integralism nationalist Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Royalism Sarkozysm Ultramontanism Principles Anti-communism Counter-revolution Dirigisme Elitism Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethnopluralism Family values French culture Imperialism Monarchism Metapolitics Nationalism Nativism Natural order Patriotism Social hierarchy Social order Souverainisme Traditional authority History Ancien Régime Monarchiens Feuillant Catholic and Royal Armies War in the Vendée Thermidorian Reaction Chouannerie Chouan First White Terror Companions of Jehu Muscadins Second White Terror Bourbon Restoration Ultra-royalists Dreyfus affair Second French Empire Philippe Daudet affair Vichy France Algiers putsch of 1961 2024 The Republicans alliance crisis Intellectuals Ballanche Bainville Barbey d'Aurevilly Barruel Barrès Baudelaire de Benoist Blanc de Saint-Bonnet de Bonald Boutang Bruckner Brunetière Brague Cau de Chateaubriand Fustel de Coulanges Cochin Daudet Delsol Dumézil Faguet Faye Freund Girardet Guénon de Gobineau Houellebecq de Jouvenel Lamennais (early) Le Bon Lefebvre Lemaître Le Play Lugan Madiran de Maistre Morel Maffesoli Massis Maurras Maulnier Marcel Nimier Poulat Rémond Renan de Rivarol Rohmer Rueff Siegfried Taine de Tocqueville Thibon Literature Considerations on France (1796) Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism (1797) The Genius of Christianity (1802) The Pope (1819) St Petersburg Dialogues (1821) Democracy in America (1835) The Ancient City (1864) " What Is a Nation?

" (1882) The Crowd (1895) Inquiry into the Monarchy (1900) "The Future of the Intelligentsia" (1905) My Political Ideas (1937) The Reign of Quantity (1945) The Opium of the Intellectuals (1955) Violence and the Sacred (1972) The Camp of the Saints (1973) The Tyranny of Guilt (2006) The French Suicide (2014) Submission (2015) Politicians Bardella Bellamy de Bonald Boulanger Cathelineau de Chateaubriand Ciotti Flandin Fouéré de Gaulle Holeindre Juppé de Kérillis Le Pen (Jean-Marie) Le Pen (Marine) Maurras Malraux MacMahon Maréchal Messiha Messmer Pécresse Pétain Peyrefitte Pichegru Poincaré Poisson de Polignac Pompidou Retailleau de La Rocque de La Tour du Pin Sarkozy Schuman de Vaublanc de Villèle de Villiers Zemmour Commentators Barbier Buisson Camus Cassen Jean Giesbert de Girardin d'Escufon Jamet Lasserre Lévy Marmin Massis Maulnier Ménard Mougeotte Nay Obertone d'Orcival d'Ornellas Pauwels Pujo Sastre Sérant Tasin Venner Parties Active Alliance Royale Debout la France French Future The Nationalists National Republican Movement Future with Confidence National Centre of Independents & Peasants National Rally Reconquête The Republicans Senate Republicans Soyons libres VIA, the Way of the People Defunct Democratic Republican Alliance Feuillants French Agrarian and Peasant Party French Social Party Movement for France Independent Radicals Independent Republicans Party of Order Rally of the French People Popular Liberal Action Rally for France Rally for the Republic Republican Federation Resistance Party Union for a Popular Movement Union for the New Republic Organisations Active Action Française Carrefour de l'Horloge Cité catholique Groupement de Recherche et d'Études pour la Civilisation Européenne Initiative and Liberty Movement La Manif pour tous Les Identitaires March for Life Nouvelle Action Royaliste Rassemblement national de la jeunesse Student Cockade UDR group Union Nationale Inter-universitaire Defunct Action Française (pre Liberation) Camelots du Roi Cercle Proudhon Civitas Croix-de-Feu Independent Republicans Hussards Service d'Action Civique Media Active Atlantico CNews Éléments Famille chrétienne L'Écho du Sud La Croix Le Figaro Le Figaro Magazine Le Point Nouvelle École Radio Courtoisie Valeurs actuelles Defunct La Liberté La Presse La Nation française Le Quotidien de Paris Minute Présent Related topics Archeofuturism Clerical philosophers European New Right Far-right movements in France France profonde French–German enmity French Revolution " Islamo-leftism " List of French conservatives Maurrassisme in Argentina Ligues d'extrême droite Politics of France Remigration Sinistrisme Sovereigntist Right Tocqueville effect Conservatism portal France portal v t e Before the Second World War , France had a relatively fragmented capitalist economic system. The many small companies, often family-owned, were often not dynamic and efficient [ citation needed ] in comparison to the large industrial groups in Germany or the United States . The Second World War laid waste to France. Railroads and industries were destroyed by aerial bombardment and sabotage ; industries were seized by Nazi Germany; in the immediate postwar years loomed the spectre of long years of rationing (such as the system enforced in that period in the United Kingdom ). Some sections of the French business and political world lost authority after collaborating with the German occupiers .

Post-war French governments, from whichever political side, generally sought rational, efficient economic development, with the long-term goal of matching the highly developed and technologically advanced economy of the United States . The development of French dirigisme coincided with the development of meritocratic technocracy : the École Nationale d'Administration supplied the state with high-level administrators, while leadership positions in industry were staffed with Corps of Mines state engineers and other personnel trained at the École Polytechnique .

During the 1945–1975 period, France experienced unprecedented economic growth (5.1% on average) and a demographic boom, leading to the coinage of the term Trente Glorieuses (the "Glorious Thirty [years]").

Dirigisme flourished under the conservative governments of Charles de Gaulle and Georges Pompidou . In those times, the policy was viewed as a middle way between the American policy of little state involvement and the Soviet policy of total state control. In 1981, Socialist president François Mitterrand was elected, promising greater state enterprise in the economy; his government soon nationalised industries and banks. However, in 1983 the initial bad economic results forced the government to renounce dirigisme and start the era of rigueur ("rigour"). This was primarily due to the Inflation of the French Franc and the Keynesian policies taken by François Mitterrand . Dirigisme has remained out of favour with subsequent governments, though some of its traits remain.

Indicative planning [ edit ] The main French tool under dirigisme was indicative planning through plans designed by the Commissariat général du plan ("Commission for the Plan"). Indicative planning used various incentives to induce public and private actors to behave in an optimal fashion, with the plan serving as a general guideline for optimal investment. During this period France never ceased to be a capitalist economy directed by the accumulation of capital , profit-maximizing enterprise and market-based allocation of producer goods.

In contrast to Soviet-type central planning practiced in the former Soviet bloc , where economic planning substituted private profit incentivized investment and operated the factors of production according to a binding plan, the French state never owned more than a minority of industry and did not seek to replace private profit with central planning. The idea of dirigisme is to complement and improve the efficiency of the market through indirect planning intended to provide better information to market participants. This concept is held in contrast to a planned economy, which aims to replace market-based allocation of production and investment with a binding plan of production expressed in units of physical quantities.

State ownership [ edit ] Because French industry prior to the Second World War was weak due to fragmentation, the French government encouraged mergers and the formation of " national champions ": large industry groups backed by the state.

Two areas where the French government sought greater control were in infrastructure and the transportation system. The French government owned the national railway company SNCF , the national electricity utility EDF , the national natural gas utility GDF , the national airline Air France ; phone and postal services were operated as the PTT administration. The government chose to devolve the construction of most autoroutes (freeways) to semi-private companies rather than to administer them itself. Other areas where the French government directly intervened were defence, nuclear and aerospace industries ( Aérospatiale ).

This development was marked by volontarisme , the belief that difficulties (e.g. postwar devastation, lack of natural resources) could be overcome through willpower and ingenuity. For instance, following the 1973 energy crisis , the saying "In France we don't have oil, but we have ideas" was coined. Volontarisme emphasized modernization , resulting in a variety of ambitious state plans. Examples of this trend include the extensive use of nuclear energy (close to 80% of French electrical consumption), the Minitel , an early online system for the masses, and the TGV , a high-speed rail network.

India [ edit ] See also: Hindu rate of growth Dirigisme is seen in India after the end of British rule from 1947 with domestic policy tending towards protectionism, a strong emphasis on import substitution industrialisation , economic interventionism , a large government-run public sector , business regulation , and central planning , [ 9 ] trade, foreign investment policies were highly restricted from policies of the Licence Raj .

[ 10 ] However, in regard to trade and foreign investment, other authors disagree stating that high tariff barriers were maintained, with import duties of 350% not being uncommon, [ 11 ] and there was also severe restrictions on the entry of foreign goods, capital, and technology.

[ 11 ] Although a mixed economy, the share of investment in public sector enterprises was 60%.

[ 12 ] India's economic policies during this period were more akin to Soviet economic planning rather than the French dirigisme model.

[ 12 ] Socialist economic planning was especially prevalent in form of the Planning Commission and Five-Year plans .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] After liberalisation in 1991, India shifted from a planned dirigisme to market dirigisme economy.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] The Indian state has complete control and ownership of railways , highways ; majority control and stake in banking , [ 17 ] insurance , [ 18 ] farming , [ 19 ] dairy , fertilizers & chemicals, [ 20 ] airports , [ 21 ] nuclear , mining, digitization , defense , steel , rare earths, water, electricity, oil and gas industries and power plants, [ 22 ] and has substantial control over digitalization , Broadband as national infrastructure , telecommunication , supercomputing , space , port and shipping industries , [ 23 ] among other industries, were effectively nationalised in the mid-1950s.

[ 24 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] In essence, the Indian Government has indirect control on all sectors except technology and consumer goods.

Other economies with dirigiste characteristics [ edit ] Economic dirigisme has been described as an inherent aspect of fascist economies by Hungarian author Iván T. Berend in his book An Economic History of Twentieth-Century Europe .

[ 25 ] However, the fascist systems created in Italy , Portugal , Spain , Japan , or Germany were a varied mix of elements from numerous philosophies, including nationalism , authoritarianism , militarism , corporatism , collectivism , totalitarianism , and anti-communism .

[ 26 ] Dirigisme has been brought up as a politico-economic scheme at odds with laissez-faire capitalism in the context of French overseas holdings. To varying degrees throughout the post-colonial period, countries such as Lebanon and Syria have been influenced by this motif.

[ 27 ] See also [ edit ] Colbertism Crony capitalism Developmental state Economic planning French Fourth Republic (1946–1958) Indicative planning Industrial policy Mercantilism Mixed economy State capitalism State-owned enterprise State-sponsored capitalism Economies with dirigisme or similar policies [ edit ] American School (1790s–1970s), the American model Beijing Consensus , the Chinese model Economy of France (1945–1975), often known as Trente Glorieuses Economy of Singapore Economy of Taiwan Four Asian Tigers Economy of Indonesia German model , the German post-war economic model Economy of Japan Japanese economic miracle National Policy (1876–1920), the Canadian model Economy of South Africa (1948–1994) References [ edit ] ^ "Dirigisme" .

Oxford Dictionaries . Retrieved 25 May 2013.

^ Schmidt, Johannes Dragsbaek (1996). "Models of Dirigisme in East Asia: Perspectives for Eastern Europe".

The Aftermath of 'Real Existing Socialism' in Eastern Europe . pp.

196– 216.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-349-14155-5_13 .

ISBN 978-1-349-14157-9 .

^ Kim, Kyunghoon (2023).

"Key Features of Indonesia's State Capitalism Under Jokowi" .

Jas (Journal of Asean Studies) .

10 (2).

doi : 10.21512/jas.v10i2.9075 .

^ Kim, Kyunghoon (2021).

"Indonesia's Restrained State Capitalism: Development and Policy Challenges" .

Journal of Contemporary Asia .

51 (3): 419– 446.

doi : 10.1080/00472336.2019.1675084 .

S2CID 211395480 .

^ Chandrasekhar, C. P. (2012), Kyung-Sup, Chang; Fine, Ben; Weiss, Linda (eds.), "From Dirigisme to Neoliberalism: Aspects of the Political Economy of the Transition in India" , Developmental Politics in Transition , London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, pp.

140– 165, doi : 10.1057/9781137028303_8 , ISBN 978-1-349-33332-5 , retrieved 2025-03-07 ^ Mazumdar, Surajit (2012-06-28), "Big business and economic nationalism in India" , Globalization and Economic Nationalism in Asia , Oxford University Press, pp.

59– 83, doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199646210.003.0003 , ISBN 978-0-19-964621-0 , retrieved 2025-03-07 ^ Chatterjee, Elizabeth (2022).

"New Developmentalism and its Discontents: State Activism in Modi's Gujarat and India" .

Development and Change .

53 : 58– 83.

doi : 10.1111/dech.12579 .

S2CID 212790073 .

^ Mazzucato, Mariana (25 June 2013).

"The myth of the 'meddling' state" .

Public Finance Focus .

^ Panagariya 2008 , pp. 31–32 ^ Panagariya 2008 , p. 24 ^ a b Tharoor 2003 , p. 242 ^ a b Sharma & Dhindsa 2005 , p. xxv ^ a b Chandrasekhar, C. P. (2012).

"From Dirigisme to Neoliberalism: Aspects of the Political Economy of the Transition in India" . In Chang, Kyung-Sup; Fine, Ben; Weiss, Linda (eds.).

Developmental Politics in Transition: The Neoliberal Era and Beyond . International Political Economy Series. London: Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp.

140– 165.

doi : 10.1057/9781137028303_8 .

ISBN 978-1-137-02830-3 . Retrieved 2020-09-04 .

^ a b Mazumdar, Surajit (2012).

"Industrialization, Dirigisme and Capitalists: Indian Big Business from Independence to Liberalization" .

mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de . Retrieved 2020-09-04 .

^ Babones, Salvatore (27 July 2011).

"Why France Has a Much Better India Strategy Than America" .

FP .

^ Srivastava, Pankaj (27 July 2011).

"I believe the neoliberal regime is also reaching a dead end: Prabhat Patnaik" .

GOVERNANCENOW .

^ D'Silva, Jeetha (1 September 2007).

"India growth story is attracting talent from govt establishments" .

Livemint .

^ Sikarwar, Deepshikha (27 July 2011).

"Sovereign guarantee for all policies issued by LIC will continue" .

The Economic Times .

^ Nirmal, Rajalakshmi (27 July 2021).

"Ending APMC monopoly: Centre bites the bullet at last" .

The Hindu .

^ Fernández, Lucía (27 July 2021).

"Leading fertilizer companies in India as of February 2021, based on net sales" .

statista .

^ "New Cargo Agency To End Aai Monopoly" .

Business Standard . 27 July 2021.

^ "Energy Statistics 2017" (PDF) .

Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation .

^ "About Us" .

Official webpage of the Shipping Corporation of India . Archived from the original on 6 November 2007 . Retrieved 3 June 2009 .

^ Staley, Sam (2006).

"The Rise and Fall of Indian Socialism: Why India embraced economic reform" .

Reason . Archived from the original on 14 January 2009 . Retrieved 17 January 2011 .

^ Berend, Ivan T.

(2006).

An Economic History of Twentieth-Century Europe: Economic Regimes from Laissez-Faire to Globalization . Cambridge University Press. p.

93 .

ISBN 978-1-139-45264-9 .

^ Baker, David (June 2006). "The political economy of fascism: Myth or reality, or myth and reality?".

New Political Economy .

11 (2): 227– 250.

doi : 10.1080/13563460600655581 .

S2CID 155046186 .

^ Quilty, Jim (October 17, 2007).

"Cohabitation leading to a shotgun wedding and a bitter divorce" .

The Daily Star . Archived from the original on July 30, 2020.

Further reading [ edit ] Cohen, Élie (1992).

Le Colbertisme "high tech" : économie des Telecom et du Grand Projet . Paris: Hachette.

ISBN 2-01-019343-1 .

Sharma, Anju; Dhindsa, K. S. (2005).

Economic Reform and Development . Concept Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-8-180-69273-4 .

Panagariya, Arvind (2008).

India: The Emerging Giant . Oxford University Press. p.

514 .

ISBN 978-0-19-531503-5 .

Tharoor, Shashi (2003).

Nehru The Invention of India . Arcade Pub.

ISBN 978-1-559-70737-4 .

v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal v t e Capitalism Aspects and perspectives General Anarchy of production Business cycle Centralization Competition Competition law Depression definitions of capitalism Deregulation Economic bubble Economic development Economic liberalism Economic planning Entrepreneurship Ecopreneurship Externality Financial crisis Financial Revolution Globalization Global labor arbitrage History of capitalist theory Industrial Revolution Invention Market economy Market failure Merchantilism Meritocracy Multinational corporation Nationalization Oligopoly Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Privatization Profit Property rights Recession Regulation Wage labour Wealth Ideology Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Conservative Corporate Democratic Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neo Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social State State-sponsored Welfare Cultural aspects Advertising American Dream Black Friday Consumerism Decentralization Economic freedom Economic mobility Individualism Liberalism Liberty Mainstream Philanthropy Private foundation Private property Rule of law Social alienation Spontaneous order Social aspects Corporatism Economic inequality Employment Freedom of association Labour market flexibility Labour supply Productivity Prosperity Syndicate Social venture capital Unemployment Criticism Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Critique of political economy Critique of work Market fundamentalism Marxism Wage slavery Antithesis Anarchism Anarcho-communism Anarcho-primitivism Anarcho-syndicalism Collectivist anarchism Communalism Communism Economic democracy Eco-socialism Free-market socialism Green anarchism Individualist anarchism Libertarian socialism Market anarchism Market socialism Mutualism Post-capitalism Post-scarcity economy Sharing economy Social anarchism Socialism Syndicalism Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐knxft
Cached time: 20250814215315
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.807 seconds
Real time usage: 0.973 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4029/1000000
Revision size: 21998/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 270227/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4878/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 147475/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.459/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18325806/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  718.490      1 -total
 31.15%  223.809      1 Template:Reflist
 22.37%  160.744      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 13.85%   99.511      1 Template:Economic_systems_sidebar
 13.63%   97.960      7 Template:Cite_book
 12.44%   89.347      1 Template:IPA
  8.94%   64.231      1 Template:Conservatism_in_France
  8.10%   58.216      4 Template:Navbox
  7.41%   53.210      1 Template:Short_description
  6.88%   49.424      1 Template:Socialism Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:909320:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215315 and revision id 1305693479. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dirigisme&oldid=1305693479 " Categories : 20th century in economic history 20th century in France Capitalism Fascism Economic history of France Economic ideologies Economic nationalism Economic systems Keynesian economics Gaullism Socialism Social democracy Ideologies of capitalism Mixed economies Presidency of Charles de Gaulle 1973 oil crisis Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with French IPA Articles needing additional references from May 2013 All articles needing additional references Articles containing French-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2008 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 15:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dirigisme 18 languages Add topic

