Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Emotions and reason 2 Criticisms 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Moral rationalism 6 languages Español فارسی Français Bahasa Melayu Türkçe Kadazandusun Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia View that moral principles are knowable a priori, by reason alone This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Moral rationalism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Moral rationalism , also called ethical rationalism , is a view in meta-ethics (specifically the epistemology of ethics ) according to which moral principles are knowable a priori , by reason alone.

[ 1 ] Some prominent figures in the history of philosophy who have defended moral rationalism are Plato and Immanuel Kant . Perhaps the most prominent figure in the history of philosophy who has rejected moral rationalism is David Hume . Recent philosophers who have defended moral rationalism include Richard Hare , Christine Korsgaard , Alan Gewirth , and Michael Smith .

Moral rationalism is similar to the rationalist version of ethical intuitionism ; however, they are distinct views. Moral rationalism is neutral on whether basic moral beliefs are known via inference or not. A moral rationalist who believes that some moral beliefs are justified non-inferentially is a rationalist ethical intuitionist . So, rationalist ethical intuitionism implies moral rationalism, but the reverse does not hold.

Emotions and reason [ edit ] There are two main forms of moral rationalism, associated with two major forms of reasoning.  If moral reasoning is based on theoretical reason , and is hence analogous to discovering empirical or scientific truths about the world, a purely emotionless being could arrive at the truths of reason.  Such a being wouldn't necessarily be motivated to act morally.  Beings who aren't motivated to act morally can also arrive at moral truths, but needn't rely upon their emotions to do so.

Many moral rationalists believe that moral reasoning is based on practical reason , which involves choices about what to do or intend to do, including how to achieve one's goals and what goals one should have in the first place.  In this view, moral reasoning always involves emotional states and hence is intrinsically motivating.  Immanuel Kant expressed this view when he said that immoral actions do not involve a contradiction in belief, but a contradiction in the will, that is, in one's commitment to a principle which one intends to motivate actions. Christine Korsgaard's elaboration of Kantian reasoning tries to show that if ethics is actually based on practical reasoning, this shows that it can be objective and universal, without having to appeal to questionable metaphysical assumptions.

Criticisms [ edit ] Moral sense theorists (or sentimentalists), such as David Hume , are the key opponents of moral rationalism. In Book 3 of A Treatise of Human Nature and in An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals (EPM), Hume argues (among other things) that reason and emotions (or the "passions" as he often calls them) are quite distinct faculties and that the foundations of morality lie in sentiment, not reason. Hume takes it as a fact about human psychology and morality that moral judgments have an essentially emotional, sentimental, or otherwise non-rational or cognitive character to them. According to Hume, "...morality is determined by sentiment. It defines virtue to be whatever mental action or quality gives to a spectator the pleasing sentiment of approbation; and vice the contrary" (EPM, Appendix 1, ¶10).

References [ edit ] ^ Ethical rationalism and the law . Capps, Patrick,, Pattinson, Shaun D. Oxford. 2017-01-26.

ISBN 9781849467865 .

OCLC 919107782 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) CS1 maint: others ( link ) Further reading [ edit ] Gewirth, Alan (1980).

Reason and Morality.

Hare, Richard (1982).

Moral Thinking.

Hume, David (1739–1740).

A Treatise of Human Nature , various printings.

Hume, David (1751).

An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals , various printings.

Kant, Immanuel (1785).

Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals , various printings.

Korsgaard, Christine (1996).

The Sources of Normativity.

Rosati, Connie S.

(2006). " Moral Motivation ," The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

Singer, M. G. (2008).

The Ideal of a Rational Morality .

Smith, Michael (1994).

The Moral Problem , Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

External links [ edit ] Moral rationalism at PhilPapers v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Moral_rationalism&oldid=1177178425 " Categories : Epistemological theories Morality Platonism Rationalism Metaethics Ethical theories Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: others Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles needing additional references from August 2010 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 26 September 2023, at 13:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Moral rationalism 6 languages Add topic

