Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Negation of a sentence containing a presupposition 2 Projection of presuppositions 3 Presupposition triggers Toggle Presupposition triggers subsection 3.1 Definite descriptions 3.2 Factive verbs 3.3 Implicative verbs 3.4 Change of state or continuation of state verbs 3.5 Iteratives 3.6 Temporal clauses 3.7 Cleft sentences 3.8 Comparisons and contrasts 3.9 Counterfactual conditionals 3.10 Questions 3.11 Possessive case 4 Accommodation of presuppositions 5 Presupposition in critical discourse analysis 6 Logical construct 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Presupposition 23 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Eesti فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Latviešu Nederlands Polski Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Svenska Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Assumed context surrounding an utterance For other uses, see Presupposition (disambiguation) .

In linguistics and philosophy , a presupposition is an implicit assumption about the world or background belief relating to an utterance whose truth is taken for granted in discourse . Examples of presuppositions include: Jane no longer writes fiction.

Presupposition: Jane once wrote fiction.

Have you stopped eating meat?

Presupposition: you had once eaten meat.

Have you talked to Hans?

Presupposition: Hans exists.

A presupposition is information that is linguistically presented as being mutually known or assumed by the speaker and addressee. This may be required for the utterance to be considered appropriate in context, but it is not uncommon for new information to be encoded in presuppositions without disrupting the flow of conversation (see accommodation below).

[ 1 ] A presupposition remains mutually known by the speaker and addressee whether the utterance is placed in the form of an assertion, denial, or question, and can be associated with a specific lexical item or grammatical feature (presupposition trigger) in the utterance.

Crucially, negation of an expression does not change its presuppositions: I want to do it again and I don't want to do it again both presuppose that the subject has done it already one or more times; My wife is pregnant and My wife is not pregnant both presuppose that the subject has a wife. In this respect, presupposition is distinguished from entailment and implicature . For example, The president was assassinated entails that The president is dead , but if the expression is negated, the entailment is not necessarily true .

Negation of a sentence containing a presupposition [ edit ] If presuppositions of a sentence are not consistent with the actual state of affairs, then one of two approaches can be taken. Given the sentences My wife is pregnant and My wife is not pregnant when one has no wife, then either: Both the sentence and its negation are false; or Strawson's approach: Both "my wife is pregnant" and "my wife is not pregnant" use a wrong presupposition (i.e. that there exists a referent which can be described with the noun phrase my wife ) and therefore can not be assigned truth values .

Bertrand Russell tries to solve this dilemma with two interpretations of the negated sentence: "There exists exactly one person, who is my wife and who is not pregnant" "There does not exist exactly one person, who is my wife and who is pregnant." For the first phrase, Russell would claim that it is false, whereas the second would be true according to him.

Projection of presuppositions [ edit ] A presupposition of a part of an utterance is sometimes also a presupposition of the whole utterance, and sometimes not. For instance, the phrase my wife triggers the presupposition that I have a wife. The first sentence below carries that presupposition, even though the phrase occurs inside an embedded clause . In the second sentence, however, it does not. John might be mistaken about his belief that I have a wife, or he might be deliberately trying to misinform his audience, and this has an effect on the meaning of the second sentence, but, perhaps surprisingly, not on the first one.

John thinks that my wife is beautiful.

John said that my wife is beautiful.

Thus, this seems to be a property of the main verbs of the sentences, think and say , respectively. After work by Lauri Karttunen , [ 2 ] [ 3 ] verbs that allow presuppositions to "pass up" to the whole sentence ("project") are called holes , and verbs that block such passing up, or projection of presuppositions are called plugs . Some linguistic environments are intermediate between plugs and holes: They block some presuppositions and allow others to project. These are called filters . An example of such an environment are indicative conditionals ("If-then" clauses). A conditional sentence contains an antecedent and a consequent . The antecedent is the part preceded by the word "if," and the consequent is the part that is (or could be) preceded by "then." If the consequent contains a presupposition trigger, and the triggered presupposition is explicitly stated in the antecedent of the conditional, then the presupposition is blocked. Otherwise, it is allowed to project up to the entire conditional. Here is an example: If I have a wife , then my wife is blonde.

Here, the presupposition (that I have a wife) triggered by the expression my wife is blocked, because it is stated in the antecedent of the conditional: That sentence doesn't imply that I have a wife. In the following example, it is not stated in the antecedent, so it is allowed to project, i.e. the sentence does imply that I have a wife.

If it's already 4am, then my wife is probably angry.

Hence, conditional sentences act as filters for presuppositions that are triggered by expressions in their consequent.

A significant amount of current work in semantics and pragmatics is devoted to a proper understanding of when and how presuppositions project.

Presupposition triggers [ edit ] A presupposition trigger is a lexical item or linguistic construction which is responsible for the presupposition, and thus "triggers" it.

[ 4 ] The following is a selection of presuppositional triggers following Stephen C. Levinson 's classic textbook on Pragmatics , which in turn draws on a list produced by Lauri Karttunen . As is customary, the presuppositional triggers themselves are italicized, and the symbol » stands for 'presupposes'.

[ 5 ] Definite descriptions [ edit ] Main article: Definite description Definite descriptions are phrases of the form "the X" where X represents a noun phrase. The description is said to be proper when the phrase applies to exactly one object, and conversely, it is said to be improper when either there exist more than one potential referents, as in "the senator from Ohio", or none at all, as in "the king of France". In conventional speech, definite descriptions are implicitly assumed to be proper, hence such phrases trigger the presupposition that the referent is unique and existent.

John saw the man with two heads.

»there exists a man with two heads.

Factive verbs [ edit ] See also: Epistemology § Truth In Western epistemology, there is a tradition originating with Plato of defining knowledge as justified true belief. On this definition, for someone to know X, it is required that X be true. A linguistic question thus arises regarding the usage of such phrases: does a person who states "John knows X" implicitly claim the truth of X?

Steven Pinker explored this question in a popular science format in a 2007 book on language and cognition, using a widely publicized example from a speech by a U.S. president.

[ 6 ] A 2003 speech by George W. Bush included the line, "British Intelligence has learned that Saddam Hussein recently sought significant quantities of uranium from Africa." [ 7 ] Over the next few years, it became apparent that this intelligence lead was incorrect. But the way the speech was phrased, using a factive verb, implicitly framed the lead as truth rather than hypothesis. There is however a strong alternative view that the factivity thesis , the proposition that relational predicates having to do with knowledge, such as knows, learn, remembers, and realized , presuppose the factual truth of their object, is incorrect.

[ 8 ] Martha regrets drinking John's home brew.

Presupposition: Martha did in fact drink John's home brew.

Frankenstein was aware that Dracula was there.

Presupposition: Dracula was in fact there.

John realized that he was in debt.

Presupposition: John was in fact in debt.

It was odd how proud he was.

Presupposition: He was in fact proud.

Some further factive predicates: know; be sorry that; be proud that; be indifferent that; be glad that; be sad that.

Implicative verbs [ edit ] John managed to open the door.

»John tried to open the door.

John forgot to lock the door.

»John ought to have locked, or intended to lock, the door.

Some further implicative predicates: X happened to V »X didn't plan or intend to V ; X avoided Ving »X was expected to, or usually did, or ought to V , etc.

Change of state or continuation of state verbs [ edit ] With these presupposition triggers, the current unfolding situation is considered presupposed information.

[ 9 ] John stopped teasing his wife.

»John had been teasing his wife.

Joan began teasing her husband.

»Joan hadn't been teasing her husband.

Some further change of state verbs: start; finish; carry on; cease; take (as in X took Y from Z » Y was at/in/with Z); leave; enter; come; go; arrive; etc.

Iteratives [ edit ] These types of triggers presuppose the existence of a previous state of affairs.

[ 9 ] The flying saucer came again .

»The flying saucer came before.

You can't get gobstoppers anymore .

»You once could get gobstoppers.

Carter returned to power.

»Carter held power before.

Further iteratives: another time; to come back; restore; repeat; for the nth time.

Temporal clauses [ edit ] The situation explained in a clause that begins with a temporal clause constructor is typically considered backgrounded information.

[ 9 ] Before Strawson was even born, Frege noticed presuppositions.

»Strawson was born.

While Chomsky was revolutionizing linguistics, the rest of social science was asleep.

»Chomsky was revolutionizing linguistics.

Since Churchill died, we've lacked a leader.

»Churchill died.

Further temporal clause constructors: after; during; whenever; as (as in As John was getting up, he slipped ).

Cleft sentences [ edit ] Cleft sentence structures highlight particular aspects of a sentence and consider the surrounding information to be backgrounded knowledge. These sentences are typically not spoken to strangers, but rather to addressees who are aware of the ongoing situation.

[ 9 ] Cleft construction: It was Henry that kissed Rosie.

»Someone kissed Rosie.

Pseudo-cleft construction: What John lost was his wallet.

»John lost something.

Comparisons and contrasts [ edit ] Comparisons and contrasts may be marked by stress (or by other prosodic means), by particles like "too", or by comparatives constructions.

Marianne called Adolph a male chauvinist, and then HE insulted HER .

»For Marianne to call Adolph a male chauvinist would be to insult him.

Carol is a better linguist than Barbara.

»Barbara is a linguist.

Counterfactual conditionals [ edit ] If the notice had only said 'mine-field' in Welsh as well as in English, we would never have lost poor Llewellyn.

»The notice didn't say 'mine-field' in Welsh.

Questions [ edit ] Questions often presuppose what the assertive part of the question presupposes, but interrogative parts might introduce further presuppositions. There are three different types of questions : yes/no questions, alternative questions and WH-questions.

Is there a professor of linguistics at MIT?

»Either there is a professor of linguistics at MIT or there isn't.

Is Newcastle in England or in Australia?

»Newcastle is in England or Newcastle is in Australia.

Who is the professor of linguistics at MIT?

»Someone is the professor of linguistics at MIT.

Possessive case [ edit ] John' s children are very noisy.

»John has children.

Accommodation of presuppositions [ edit ] A presupposition of a sentence must normally be part of the common ground of the utterance context (the shared knowledge of the interlocutors ) in order for the sentence to be felicitous. Sometimes, however, sentences may carry presuppositions that are not part of the common ground and nevertheless be felicitous. For example, I can, upon being introduced to someone, out of the blue explain that my wife is a dentist, this without my addressee having ever heard, or having any reason to believe that I have a wife. In order to be able to interpret my utterance, the addressee must assume that I have a wife. This process of an addressee assuming that a presupposition is true, even in the absence of explicit information that it is, is usually called presupposition accommodation . We have just seen that presupposition triggers like my wife ( definite descriptions ) allow for such accommodation. In "Presupposition and Anaphora: Remarks on the Formulation of the Projection Problem", [ 10 ] the philosopher Saul Kripke noted that some presupposition triggers do not seem to permit such accommodation. An example of that is the presupposition trigger too . This word triggers the presupposition that, roughly, something parallel to what is stated has happened. For example, if pronounced with emphasis on John , the following sentence triggers the presupposition that somebody other than John had dinner in New York last night.

John had dinner in New York last night, too.

But that presupposition, as stated, is completely trivial, given what we know about New York. Several million people had dinner in New York last night, and that in itself doesn't satisfy the presupposition of the sentence. What is needed for the sentence to be felicitous is really that somebody relevant to the interlocutors had dinner in New York last night, and that this has been mentioned in the previous discourse, or that this information can be recovered from it. Presupposition triggers that disallow accommodation are called anaphoric presupposition triggers.

Presupposition in critical discourse analysis [ edit ] Critical discourse analysis (CDA) is a broad study belonging to not one research category. It focuses on identifying presuppositions of an abstract nature from varying perspectives. CDA is considered critical, not only in the sense of being analytical, but also in the ideological sense.

[ 11 ] Through the analysis of written texts and verbal speech, Teun A. van Dijk (2003) says CDA studies power imbalances existing in both the conversational and political spectrum.

[ 11 ] With the purpose of first identifying and then tackling inequality in society, van Dijk describes CDA as a nonconformist piece of work.

[ 11 ] One notable feature of ideological presuppositions researched in CDA is a concept termed synthetic personalisation [ 12 ] Logical construct [ edit ] To describe a presupposition in the context of propositional calculus and truth-bearers , Belnap defines "A sentence is a presupposition of a question if the truth of the sentence is a necessary condition of the question's having some true answer." Then referring to the semantic theory of truth , interpretations are used to formulate a presupposition : "Every interpretation which makes the question truly answerable is an interpretation which makes the presupposed sentence true as well." A sentence that expresses a presupposition in a question may be characterized as follows: the question has some true answer if and only if the sentence is true.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Common ground Conversational scoreboard Context (linguistics) Double-barreled question Dynamic semantics Fallacy of many questions Intertextuality Loaded question Performative contradiction Speech act Strawson entailment References [ edit ] ^ Kroeger, Paul.

Analyzing meaning: An introduction to semantics and pragmatics . Third edition. 2024, page 45.

^ Karttunen, Lauri (1974).

"Presupposition and Linguistic Context" .

Theoretical Linguistics .

1 ( 1– 3).

doi : 10.1515/thli.1974.1.1-3.181 .

ISSN 0301-4428 . Archived from the original on 2023-05-21 . Retrieved 2023-05-21 .

Alt URL ^ Pragmatics: A Reader, Steven Davis (ed.), pages 406-415, Oxford University Press, 1991.

^ Kadmon, Nirit.

Formal pragmatics: semantics, pragmatics, presupposition, and focus . Great Britain: Wiley-Blackwell, 2001, page 10.

^ Levinson, Stephen C.

Pragmatics.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983, pp. 181-184.

^ Pinker, Steven (2007), The stuff of thought: language as a window into human nature , Penguin Books, ISBN 978-0-670-06327-7 , pp. 6–9 .

{{ citation }} : External link in |postscript= ( help ) CS1 maint: postscript ( link ) ^ Bush, George W., State of the Union Address , January 28th, 2003.

^ Hazlett, A. (2010). "The Myth of Factive Verbs".

Philosophy and Phenomenological Research .

80 (3): 497– 522.

doi : 10.1111/j.1933-1592.2010.00338.x .

^ a b c d Sedivy, Julie, and Carlson, Greg N. (2011). "Sold on Language: How Advertisers Talk to You and What This Says About You," Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 104-105.

^ Kripke, Saul (2009) "Presupposition and Anaphora: Remarks on the Formulation of the Projection Problem," Linguistic Inquiry , Vol. 40, No. 3, Pages 367-386.

[1] ^ a b c "Critical discourse analysis (CDA) is a type of discourse analytical research that primarily studies the way social power abuse, dominance, and inequality are enacted, reproduced, and resisted by text and talk in the social and political context. With such dissident research, critical discourse analysts take explicit position, and thus want to understand, expose, and ultimately resist social inequality." Teun Adrianus van Dijk , " Critical Discourse Analysis Archived 2009-02-06 at the Wayback Machine ", chapter 18 in Deborah Schiffrin, Deborah Tannen and Heidi E. Hamilton (eds.), The Handbook of Discourse Analysis , ( Wiley-Blackwell , 2003): pp. 352–371.

^ "Synthetic personalisation" , Wikipedia , 2017-07-29 , retrieved 2020-05-15 ^ Nuel D. Belnap, Jr.

(1966) "Questions, Answers, and Presuppositions", The Journal of Philosophy 63(20): 609–11, American Philosophical Association Eastern Division Sixty-Third Annual Meeting.

doi : 10.2307/2024255 Further reading [ edit ] Beaver, David .

[ dead link ] 1997. Presupposition. In J. van Benthem and A. ter Meulen (eds.), The Handbook of Logic and Language , Elsevier, pp. 939–1008.

Henk Zeevat . 2007. Accommodation. In Ramchand, G. and C. Reiss (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Linguistic Interfaces , Oxford University Press . pp. 503–538.

External links [ edit ] Geurts, Bart.

"Presupposition" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Logic History Major fields Computer science Formal semantics (natural language) Inference Philosophy of logic Proof Semantics of logic Syntax Logics Classical Informal Critical thinking Reason Mathematical Non-classical Philosophical Theories Argumentation Metalogic Metamathematics Set Foundations Abduction Analytic and synthetic propositions Antecedent Consequent Contradiction Paradox Antinomy Deduction Deductive closure Definition Description Dichotomy Entailment Linguistic Form Induction Logical truth Name Necessity and sufficiency Premise Probability Proposition Reference Statement Substitution Truth Validity Lists Topics Mathematical logic Boolean algebra Set theory Other Logicians Rules of inference Paradoxes Fallacies Logic symbols Category Outline Portal WikiProject changes v t e Worldview Related terms Basic beliefs / Beliefs Collective consciousness / Collective unconscious Conceptual system Context Conventional wisdom Conventions Cultural movement Epic poetry / National epics / World folk-epics Facts and factoids Framing Ideology Life stance Lifestyle Memes / Memeplex Mental model Metanarrative Mindset Norms Paradigm Philosophical theory Point of view Presuppositions Primal world beliefs Reality tunnel Schemata School of thought Set Social reality Theory of everything Umwelt Value system Aspects Biases Academic Attentional Attitude polarization Belief Cognitive list Collective narcissism Confirmation Congruence Cryptomnesia Cultural Ethnocentrism Filter bubble Homophily In-group favoritism Magical thinking Media Observational error Observer-expectancy Selective exposure Selective perception Self-deception Self-fulfilling prophecy Clever Hans effect placebo effect wishful thinking Status quo Stereotyping ethnic Change and maintenance Activism Argument Argumentum ad populum Attitude change Brainwashing Censorship Charisma Circular reporting Cognitive dissonance Critical thinking Crowd manipulation Cultural dissonance Deprogramming Echo chamber Education religious values Euphemism Excommunication Fearmongering Historical revisionism negationism Ideological repression Indoctrination Manipulation (psychology) Media manipulation Media regulation Missionaries Moral entrepreneurship Persuasion Polite fiction Political engineering Propaganda Propaganda model Proselytism Psychological warfare Religious conversion forced Religious persecution Religious uniformity Revolutions Rhetoric Self-censorship Social change Social control Social engineering Social influence Social progress Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Woozle effect Culture Anthropology cultural social Calendars Ceremonies Coronations Cross-cultural psychology Cultural psychology Doctrine Employment / Serfdom / Slavery Families Funerals / Burial Games Holidays Hygiene ritual Identity (philosophy) cultural Institutions Liminality Liturgy Marriage Myth and ritual Oaths Pilgrimages Play Rites of passage secular Rituals Social class / Social status / Caste Symbols Symbolic boundaries Worship Groupthink Abilene paradox Bandwagon effect Collectives Collective behavior animal Collective effervescence Collective intelligence Conformity Consensus theory Crowd psychology Cults Culture-bound syndromes Deindividuation Doublethink Emergence Emotional contagion Entitativity False consensus effect Folie à deux Group action Group cohesiveness Group dynamics Group emotion Group polarization Groupshift Herd behavior Holism Hysterical contagion Information cascade In-group and out-group Invisible hand Lynching Majoritarianism / Mob rule Mass action Mass psychogenic illness Milieu control Mobbing Moral panic Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Political correctness Pseudoconsensus Scapegoating Self-organization Social action Social behavior Social emotions Social exclusion Social facilitation animal Social group Social proof Social psychology Sociology Spontaneous order Status quo Stigmergy Swarm behaviour System justification Viral phenomena Knowledge Axioms tacit assumptions Conceptual framework Epistemology outline Evidence anecdotal scientific Explanations Faith fideism Gnosis Intuition Meaning-making Memory Meta-knowledge Methodology Observation Observational learning Perception Reasoning fallacious logic Revelation Testimony Tradition folklore Truth consensus theory criteria World disclosure Metaphysics Ætiology Afterlife Anima mundi Causality Concepts Consciousness mind–body problem Cosmogony Cosmology religious Creation myth Deities existence Destiny Eschatology Everything / Nothing Evolution Existence Fiction / Nonfiction Free will Future History Ideas Idios kosmos Illusions Incarnation Information Intelligence Magic Matter Miracles Mythology comparative National mythoi Nature philosophical Ontology Origin myths political Otherworlds axes mundi Physics natural philosophy Problem of evil Reality Souls Spirit Supernature Teleology Theology Time Unobservables Value Aesthetic taste Aesthetic Almsgiving / Charity Altruism Autonomy Beauty Codes of conduct Comedy Common good Conscience Consent Creativity Disgust Duty Economics Ecstasy emotional religious Elegance Emotions Aesthetic Entertainment Eroticism Ethics Étiquette Family values Food and drink prohibitions unclean animals Golden Rule Guilt / Culpability Happiness Harmony Honour Human rights Judgement Justice Law jurisprudence religious Liberty political freedom Love Magnificence Maxims Meaning of life Morality public Obligations Peace Piety Praxeology Principles Punishment Qualities Repentance Reverence Rights Sexuality ethics Sin Social stigma Stewardship Styles Sublime, The Suffering Sympathy Taboo Theodicy Trust Unspoken rules Virtues and Vices Works of art Wrongdoing Examples Attitudes Misanthropy Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Economic and political ideologies Anarchism Authoritarianism Capitalism Christian democracy Collectivism Colonialism Communalism Communism Communitarianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Distributism Environmentalism Extremism Fanaticism Fascism Feminism Fundamentalism Globalism Green politics Imperialism Individualism Industrialisation Intellectualism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Masculism Militarism Monarchism Nationalism Pacifism Progressivism Radicalism Reformism Republicanism Sentientism Social democracy Socialism Utilitarianism Veganism Religions African traditional religions Baháʼí Buddhism Caodaism Cheondoism Chinese folk religion Christianity Eastern Orthodox Church Ethnic religions Hinduism Hòa Hảo Islam Jainism Judaism Korean shamanism Modern paganism Rastafari Secularity / Irreligion / Agnosticism / Atheism Shinto Sikhism Spiritism Taoism Tenrikyo Unitarian Universalism Zoroastrianism Schools of philosophy Agriculturalism Aristotelianism Atomism Averroism Cartesianism Cārvāka Collectivism Confucianism / New Confucianism Critical theory Cynicism Cyrenaics Determinism Dualism Eleatics Empiricism Epicureanism Eretrian school Existentialism Fatalism Foundationalism Hedonism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Historicism / New historicism Holism Humanism / Renaissance humanism Idealism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Individualism Ionian Kantianism / Neo-Kantianism Kokugaku Legalism Logicians Materialism Megarian school Modernism / Postmodernism Mohism Monism Natural law Naturalism (Chinese) Naturalism (Western) Nihilism Peripatetic Phenomenology Platonism / Neoplatonism Pluralism Positivism Pragmatism Pre-Socratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism / Neopythagoreanism Rationalism Reductionism Scholasticism / Neo-scholasticism Sentientism Social constructionism Sophism Spinozism Stoicism Structuralism / Post-structuralism Thomism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism Yangism v t e Formal semantics (natural language) Central concepts Compositionality Denotation Entailment Extension Generalized quantifier Intension Logical form Presupposition Proposition Reference Scope Speech act Syntax–semantics interface Truth conditions Topics Areas Anaphora Ambiguity Binding Conditionals Definiteness Disjunction Evidentiality Focus Indexicality Lexical semantics Modality Negation Propositional attitudes Tense–aspect–mood Quantification Vagueness Phenomena Antecedent-contained deletion Cataphora Coercion Conservativity Counterfactuals Crossover effects Cumulativity De dicto and de re De se Deontic modality Discourse relations Donkey anaphora Epistemic modality Exhaustivity Faultless disagreement Free choice inferences Givenness Homogeneity (linguistics) Hurford disjunction Inalienable possession Intersective modification Logophoricity Mirativity Modal subordination Opaque contexts Performatives Polarity items Privative adjectives Quantificational variability effect Responsive predicate Rising declaratives Scalar implicature Sloppy identity Subsective modification Subtrigging Telicity Temperature paradox Veridicality Formalism Formal systems Alternative semantics Categorial grammar Combinatory categorial grammar Discourse representation theory (DRT) Dynamic semantics Generative grammar Glue semantics Inquisitive semantics Intensional logic Lambda calculus Mereology Montague grammar Segmented discourse representation theory (SDRT) Situation semantics Supervaluationism Type theory TTR Concepts Autonomy of syntax Context set Continuation Conversational scoreboard Downward entailing Existential closure Function application Meaning postulate Monads Plural quantification Possible world Quantifier raising Quantization Question under discussion Semantic parsing Squiggle operator Strawson entailment Strict conditional Type shifter Universal grinder See also Cognitive semantics Computational semantics Distributional semantics Formal grammar Inferentialism Logic translation Linguistics wars Philosophy of language Pragmatics Semantics of logic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hq25j
Cached time: 20250817230946
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.357 seconds
Real time usage: 0.497 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1364/1000000
Revision size: 20708/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 136227/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1109/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 51413/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.177/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5679750/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  331.644      1 -total
 25.51%   84.616      8 Template:Navbox
 22.22%   73.707      2 Template:Cite_journal
 22.15%   73.444      1 Template:Logic
 19.19%   63.650      1 Template:Short_description
 10.78%   35.743      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.21%   27.223      1 Template:Dead_link
  6.90%   22.867      1 Template:Fix
  6.19%   20.531      2 Template:Category_handler
  6.13%   20.339      1 Template:Other_uses Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1965727:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817230946 and revision id 1297079519. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Presupposition&oldid=1297079519 " Categories : Semantics Pragmatics Concepts in logic Cognitive inertia Formal semantics (natural language) Hidden categories: CS1 errors: external links CS1 maint: postscript Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2017 This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 01:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Presupposition 23 languages Add topic

