Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Publishing Toggle Publishing subsection 2.1 Ebooks 2.2 Open access 3 List of journals 4 Business 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Edinburgh University Press 10 languages বাংলা فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Norsk bokmål Português Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 55°56′37″N 3°11′26″W ﻿ / ﻿ 55.9436°N 3.1905°W ﻿ / 55.9436; -3.1905 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British publisher of academic books and journals Edinburgh University Press Parent company University of Edinburgh Country of origin United Kingdom Headquarters location Edinburgh , Scotland, UK Distribution Macmillan Distribution (UK, Europe, and Middle East) Ingram (The Americas) New South Books (Australia and New Zealand) Taylor and Francis (Asia) [ 1 ] Publication types Books, academic journals Revenue £ 4.05 million [ 2 ] Official website euppublishing .com Edinburgh University Press is a scholarly publisher of academic books and journals , based in Edinburgh , Scotland.

History [ edit ] Edinburgh University Press was founded in the 1940s and became a wholly owned subsidiary of the University of Edinburgh in 1992.

[ 3 ] Books and journals published by the press carry the imprimatur of The University of Edinburgh. All proposed publishing projects are appraised and approved by the Press Committee, which consists of academics from the university. Since August 2004, the Press has had Charitable Status.

[ 4 ] In November 2013, Edinburgh University Press acquired Dundee University Press for an undisclosed sum, with a stated aim to increase textbook and digital sales, with a particular focus on law.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Brodies advised Edinburgh University Press on the terms of the acquisition.

[ 7 ] Publishing [ edit ] Edinburgh University Press publishes a range of research publications, which include scholarly monographs and reference works , as well as materials which are available on-line. The press also publishes textbooks for students and lecturers.

[ 4 ] The press publishes around 205 books and 42 journals each year.

[ 8 ] Edinburgh University Press publishes mostly in humanities and social sciences.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Ebooks [ edit ] The press participates in the ebook platforms University Press Scholarship Online (as Edinburgh Scholarship Online), [ 11 ] Books at JSTOR [ 12 ] and University Publishing Online, [ 13 ] and also works with a number of ebook aggregators.

[ 14 ] Open access [ edit ] EUP supports both gold and green open access publishing, [ 15 ] and is one of 13 publishers to participate in the Knowledge Unlatched pilot, a global library consortium approach to funding open access books .

[ 16 ] List of journals [ edit ] African Journal of International and Comparative Law Architectural Heritage Archives of Natural History Ben Jonson Journal Comparative Critical Studies Corpora Dance Research Derrida Today Edinburgh Law Review Film-Philosophy Innes Review International Journal of Humanities and Arts Computing Journal of Arabic and Islamic Studies Journal of Beckett Studies Journal of British Cinema and Television Journal of Holy Land and Palestine Studies Journal of Late Antique, Islamic and Byzantine Studies Journal of Qur'anic Studies Journal of Scottish Historical Studies Journal of Scottish Philosophy Oxford Literary Review Paragraph Psychoanalysis and History Romanticism Scottish Archaeological Journal The Scottish Historical Review Studies in World Christianity Translation and Literature Word Structure Business [ edit ] The trustees normally meet five times a year, and are responsible for the conduct of the Edinburgh University Press.

[ 4 ] Edinburgh University Press achieved combined book and journal revenues of over £4,000,000 for the year ending 31 July 2021, a 9% increase on the previous year, earning a profit of £316,000.

[ 2 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Distribution – Edinburgh University Press" . Retrieved 23 October 2017 .

^ a b "Edinburgh University Press Annual Report 2021" (PDF) . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ "Edinburgh University Press" . University of Edinburgh . Retrieved 1 December 2013 .

^ a b c "About Us" . Edinburgh University Press. Archived from the original on 30 July 2012 . Retrieved 1 December 2013 .

^ Campbell, Lisa (4 November 2013).

"Dundee UP acquired by Edinburgh" . The Bookseller . Retrieved 1 December 2013 .

^ "Edinburgh University Press buys Dundee publisher" .

BBC News . 4 November 2013 . Retrieved 1 December 2013 .

^ "Brodies advised Edinburgh University Press" . Brodies . Retrieved 1 December 2013 .

^ "Edinburgh University Press" . JSTOR . Retrieved 1 December 2013 .

^ "Publisher of the Month: Edinburgh University Press" . Books from Scotland. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 1 December 2013 .

^ "About Us" . Edinburgh University Press . Retrieved 17 May 2016 .

^ "Edinburgh Scholarship Online" . University Press Scholarship Online . Retrieved 9 September 2016 .

^ "Books at JSTOR" . JSTOR. Archived from the original on 10 December 2015 . Retrieved 9 September 2016 .

^ Campbell, Lisa (11 September 2012).

"EUP & Boydell join University Publishing Online" . The Bookseller.

Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 1 December 2013 .

^ "Librarian Orders: Ebooks for Libraries" . Edinburgh University Press. Archived from the original on 19 September 2016 . Retrieved 9 September 2016 .

^ "Open Access" . Edinburgh University Press . Retrieved 17 May 2016 .

^ "Good for publishers" .

knowledgeunlatched.org .

External links [ edit ] Official website – Corporate information and journals publishing programme Official website – books publishing programme v t e University of Edinburgh Governance Chancellor : Anne, Princess Royal Principal : Sir Peter Mathieson Rector : Simon Fanshawe University Court Senatus Academicus General Council History Academic dress Robert Reid Robert Rollock Edinburgh Seven Plinian Society Polish School of Medicine Privileged bodies of the United Kingdom Combined Scottish Universities Parliamentary Constituency Edinburgh and St Andrews Universities Parliamentary Constituency People List of notable people List of medical people List of professorships Academic divisions College of Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences Business Economics Edinburgh College of Art Moray House Health in Social Science History, Classics and Archaeology Law Literatures, Languages and Cultures Social and Political Science Centre for Open Learning Edinburgh Futures Institute College of Medicine and Veterinary Medicine Medical School Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies College of Science and Engineering Chemistry GeoSciences Informatics Physics and Astronomy Sub-units, centres and institutes AIAI CHB CRM CSWC CTPI DCC ECRC EDI EPCC ESALA Euan MacDonald Centre IASH ICMS ISSTI Koestler Parapsychology Unit LFCS MRC HGU Nursing Studies Roslin Institute Scottish Studies UKCA Places 40 George Square Adam House Appleton Tower Bedlam Theatre BioQuarter Bristo Square Deaconess House Forrest Hill Building Informatics Forum Lady Yester's Kirk Lauriston Building Library George Square Gordon Aikman Lecture Theatre King's Buildings McEwan Hall New College Old College Pleasance Pollock Halls Potterrow Reid Concert Hall Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh Royal Hospital for Children and Young People Royal Observatory Salisbury Green St Cecilia's Hall St Leonard's Hall St Albert's Catholic Chaplaincy Talbot Rice Gallery Teviot Row House Western General Hospital Student life Students' Association Sports Union Men's Football Club Women's Football Club Boat Club Men's Hockey Club Rugby Football Club The Scottish Boat Race The Scottish Varsity Labour Students Meadows Marathon Music Society Royal Medical Society Edinburgh University Theatre Company Socialist Society The Improverts FreshAir (student radio) The Journal (newspaper) The Student (newspaper) University Royal Naval Unit East Scotland Associated Alan Turing Institute Cameron Prize Edinburgh Stanford Link Edinburgh University Press Gifford Lectures James Tait Black Memorial Prize Scotland's Rural College Zhejiang University-University of Edinburgh Institute Category Commons Wikinews Wikisource Portal : Books Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Poland Israel Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX 55°56′37″N 3°11′26″W ﻿ / ﻿ 55.9436°N 3.1905°W ﻿ / 55.9436; -3.1905 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Edinburgh_University_Press&oldid=1297336244 " Categories : University of Edinburgh University presses of the United Kingdom Book publishing companies of Scotland 1953 establishments in Scotland Publishing companies established in 1953 Companies based in Edinburgh British companies established in 1953 Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2021 Use British English from February 2017 Coordinates not on Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 June 2025, at 15:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Edinburgh University Press 10 languages Add topic

