Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Planning 1.2 Faults 1.3 Treatment 1.4 Fatal fire 1.5 Aftermath 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Seacliff Lunatic Asylum 1 language Bosanski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 45°40′31″S 170°37′20″E ﻿ / ﻿ 45.675254°S 170.622091°E ﻿ / -45.675254; 170.622091 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Former psychiatric hospital in New Zealand Hospital in Seacliff, New Zealand Seacliff Lunatic Asylum Geography Location Seacliff , New Zealand Coordinates 45°40′31″S 170°37′20″E ﻿ / ﻿ 45.675254°S 170.622091°E ﻿ / -45.675254; 170.622091 Organisation Type Specialist Services Beds 500 [ 1 ] Speciality Psychiatric hospital History Construction started 1878 Opened 1884 Closed 1973 Links Lists Hospitals in New Zealand Seacliff Lunatic Asylum (often Seacliff Asylum , later Seacliff Mental Hospital ) was a psychiatric hospital in Seacliff , New Zealand. When built in the late 19th century, it was the largest building in the country, noted for its scale and extravagant architecture. It became infamous for construction faults resulting in partial collapse, as well as a 1942 fire which destroyed a wooden outbuilding, claiming 37 lives (39 in other sources), because the victims were trapped in a locked ward.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The asylum was less than 30 kilometres north of Dunedin and close to the county centre of Palmerston , in an isolated coastal spot within a forested reserve.

[ 3 ] The site is now divided between the Truby King Recreation Reserve , where most of the old buildings have been demolished and most of the area remains dense woodland, and privately owned land where several of the smaller hospital buildings have been renovated completely.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Seacliff is claimed to be haunted by former patients of what was the country's biggest building at the time.

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] New Zealand's largest building was an exercise in Gothic Revival architecture , but its facades belied the utilitarianism of its repetitious interior.

Planning [ edit ] The need for a new asylum in the Dunedin area was created by the Otago gold rush expansion of the city, and triggered by the inadequacy of the Littlebourne Mental Asylum. In 1875, the Provincial Council decided to build a new structure on "a reserve of fine land at Brinn's Point, north of Port Chalmers ". Initial work was begun in the "dense trackless forest" in 1878, though the Director of the Geological Survey criticised the site location, because he felt that the hillside was unstable.

[ 4 ] Seacliff Asylum was one of the most important works of Robert Lawson , a New Zealand architect of the 19th century. Known for designing in a range of styles, including the Gothic Revival , [ 7 ] he started work on the new asylum in 1874, and was involved with it until the completion of the main block in 1884. At that time, it was New Zealand's largest building, and was to house 500 patients and 50 staff.

[ 8 ] It had cost NZ$78,000 to construct.

[ 4 ] Architecturally, Lawson's work on the asylum was very exuberant, making some of his previous designs look comparatively tame. The asylum had turrets on corbels projecting from nearly every corner, with the gabled roof line dominated by a large tower complete with further turrets and a spire. The building contained four and a half million bricks made of local clay on the site and was 225 metres long by 67 metres wide. The great central tower of 50 m height, an essential element of many revivalist designs, [ citation needed ] was also proposed to double as an observation tower if inmates should try to escape.

[ 8 ] It was later said of the building and its (forlorn) location that: "The Victorians might not have wanted their lunatics living with them, but they liked to house them grandly." [ 8 ] The asylum was progressively added to in later years as it was transformed to function as a working farm, though most of the newer buildings were much simpler wooden structures. Staff lived in separate accommodation close to the wards, and they were able to socialise in nearby Dunedin.

[ 9 ] Faults [ edit ] The hospital in 1884, with the main buildings completed.

Structural problems began to manifest themselves even before the first building was completed, and in 1887, only three years after the opening of the main block, a major landslide occurred – predicted as a risk by the surveyors – and affected a temporary building.

Problems with the design's stability could no longer be ignored even at the time, [ 10 ] and in 1888 an enquiry into the collapse was set up. In February of that year, realising that he could be in legal trouble, Lawson applied to the enquiry to be allowed counsel to defend him. During the enquiry all involved in the construction – including the contractor, the head of the Public Works Department, the projects clerk of works and Lawson himself – gave evidence to support their competence. The enquiry decided that it was the architect who carried the ultimate responsibility, and Lawson was found both 'negligent and incompetent'. This may be considered an unreasonable finding as the nature of the site's underlying bentonite clays was beyond contemporary knowledge of soil mechanics , with Lawson singled out to bear the blame [ 11 ] (but this disregards the fact that the site's problems had been pointed out by the surveyors). As New Zealand was at this time suffering an economic recession, Lawson found himself virtually unemployable.

[ 11 ] The main block survived until 1959, when it was demolished because of further earth movement.

[ 4 ] Treatment [ edit ] Picture of nurses on front lawn of Seacliff Lunatic Asylum, 1890.

Treatment of the patients at Seacliff, whether insane , intellectually disabled or held in the institution for what would today be classed as simply being difficult, [ 12 ] was often very callous, even cruel, a feature of many mental asylums of the times.

[ 13 ] Janet Frame , a writer, was held at the asylum during the 1940s and wrongly diagnosed as a schizophrenic .

[ 14 ] In her autobiography, she recalled that: "The attitude of those in charge, who unfortunately wrote the reports and influenced the treatment, was that of reprimand and punishment, with certain forms of medical treatment being threatened as punishment for failure to 'co-operate' and where 'not co-operate' might mean a refusal to obey an order, say, to go to the doorless lavatories with six others and urinate in public while suffering verbal abuse by the nurse for being unwilling. 'Too fussy are we? Well, Miss Educated, you’ll learn a thing or two here." [ 15 ] Frame describes other patients being beaten for bedwetting , and that all patients tended to continually look for the possibility of running away.

[ 16 ] She only escaped lobotomy at Seacliff because of her new-found public success; she had won a literary prize while in the institution. Others were not so fortunate, being forced to submit to what today would be considered barbaric procedures such as the 'unsexing' operation (removal of fallopian tubes , ovaries and clitoris ) of Annemarie Anon [sic] in what was at the time considered a 'successful' treatment.

[ 4 ] Electroconvulsive therapy was also widely used.

At the same time, Seacliff was groundbreaking in some parts of its treatment programme, with noted medical reformer Truby King appointed Medical Superintendent in 1889, a position he held for 30 years. Patients were 'prescribed' fresh air, exercise, good nutrition and productive work (for example, in on-site laundries, gardens, and a forge) as part of their therapeutic regime.

[ 17 ] King is credited as having turned what was essentially conceived as a prison into an efficient working farm.

[ 8 ] Another of King's innovations, was his implementation of small dormitories housed in buildings adjacent to the larger asylum. This style of accommodation has been considered the forerunner to the villa system later adopted by all mental health institutions in New Zealand.

[ 18 ] Seacliff Mental Hospital ca. 1926 during a cricket match A nurse working at the hospital in the later years of its operation describes the situation much less critically than Frame, noting that while many patients at Seacliff during her time (1940s) would not have been confined in modern days, the atmosphere was more like that of a large working community. Patients capable of working were asked to help with various duties, partly because of staff shortages in World War II . Unless considered dangerous, patients were allowed some liberties, such as being allowed to go fishing [ 9 ] – an activity that provided patients with leisure time, while also helping the fishing business Truby King had long ago established at nearby Karitane .

[ 8 ] Fatal fire [ edit ] Around 9:45 pm on 8 December 1942, a fire broke out in Ward 5 of the hospital (also called the 'Simla' building).

[ 4 ] Ward 5 was a two-storey wooden structure added onto the original construction, holding 39 (41 according to some sources) female patients. All patients had been locked into their rooms or into the 20-bed dormitory , partially because World War II had caused a nursing staff shortage. Checks were made only once an hour.

[ 3 ] [ 19 ] After the fire was noticed by a male attendant, the hospital's firefighters tried to extinguish the flames with water from a close-by hydrant, while two women were saved from rooms that did not have locked shutters. However, the flames were too strong, and after an hour the ward was reduced to ashes, though the fire was kept from spreading to other buildings. All patients who remained in Ward 5 are thought to have died from suffocation from smoke inhalation.

[ 19 ] An inquiry into the fire criticised the lack of nursing staff, but praised the firefighters for their prompt and valiant actions, including the quick evacuation of many other patients in nearby threatened buildings.

[ 3 ] It also remarked on the critical absence of sprinklers (present in other new sections of the institution), and recommended their installation in all psychiatric institutions. The cause of the fire was not found, though there was speculation about an electrical short circuit due to shifting foundations. The disaster remained New Zealand's worst loss of life in a fire until the Ballantyne's store disaster in Christchurch five years later.

[ 19 ] Aftermath [ edit ] Little remains on the Truby King Reserve of the hospital other than a few building foundations.

Primarily as a result of worsening ground conditions which progressively affected many of the buildings, the hospital functions of Seacliff were progressively moved to Cherry Farm , closing in 1973. The site was subdivided, with the land surrounding the original building site later becoming Truby King Recreation Reserve , having passed into the ownership of Dunedin City in 1991. Around 80% of the reserve is densely wooded, with the area commonly called the 'Enchanted Forest'.

[ 4 ] The last remaining building in the reserve was demolished due to structural faults in 1992, after an initiative to establish a transport museum had failed.

The remaining area of hospital buildings outside the Reserve is privately owned. In the summer of 2006-2007, regular guided tours of the hospital grounds were operated in conjunction with the Taieri Gorge Railway 's Seasider tourist train service.

[ 5 ] In November 2023, a femur and patient tag were found in a shallow grave under a tree in the reserve, leading to a police investigation.

[ 20 ] The femur was found to be an animal bone.

[ 21 ] See also [ edit ] List of disasters in New Zealand by death toll Janet Frame , the most famous of the asylum's patients / inmates Truby King , medical reformer, administrator of the asylum for 30 years Lionel Terry , a schizophrenic white supremacist murderer who died at Seacliff, after several escapes [ 22 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Seacliff Hospital fire" .

christchurchcitylibraries.com .

Christchurch City Council .

^ Fire: Seacliff Mental Hospital (from the Christchurch City Libraries website) ^ a b c d The Seacliff Fire (from Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand ) ^ a b c d e f g Truby King Recreation Reserve Management Plan (from the Dunedin City Council website, 5 August 1998) ^ a b Seacliff asylum's painful and haunting history – Otago Daily Times , Saturday 27 January 2007 ^ Haunted New Zealand Road Trip . New Holland Publishers. 2017. pp.

264– 265.

ISBN 9781869664640 .

^ Historic Place Assessment Under Section 23 Criteria Archived 27 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine (from the heritage assessment of the Mental Health Museum, Porirua , January 1999) ^ a b c d e Bartle, Rhonda (1 February 2005).

"Give me the Impossible – the story of Truby King and the Plunket Movement" .

Puke Ariki . Archived from the original on 17 June 2007.

^ a b Memories are made of this – McLeod, Kath; Otago Age Concern publication, via Caversham Project, University of Otago ^ Papers Past (Transcription excerpts) – Hawkes Bay Herald , February 1888 ^ a b Louise Fisher (13 February 2021).

"The story of Seacliff, the most haunted place in New Zealand" .

The Spinoff . Retrieved 22 November 2021 .

^ Hospitals, Mental – Early Problems (from Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand ) ^ Compo for psychiatric patients 'a difficult issue' – New Zealand Press Association , Friday 29 June 2007 ^ A survivor against the odds – noted New Zealand writer Janet Frame dies – Rees, Margaret; World Socialist Website , 2 March 2004 ^ An Angel at My Table – Frame, Janet; 1984 ^ Book Review – Wrestling with the Angel – Mason, Carolyn; M.A.

University of Canterbury , 1 August 2001 ^ (Anonymous, "The Cyclopedia of New Zealand", The Cyclopedia Company, 1905) ^ [1] – KING, Sir Frederic Truby CMG in An Encyclopaedia of New Zealand,1966 (from Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand ) ^ a b c New Zealand Disasters – Seacliff Mental Hospital Fire (from the New Zealand Society of Genealogists newsletter, Dunedin Branch, March/April 2004) ^ McNeilly, Hamish (2 November 2023).

"Bone and patient tag found in 'shallow grave' at former asylum" .

Stuff . Retrieved 2 November 2023 .

^ "Bone and tag found at former asylum is not from a human - police" .

^ Lionel Terry (from Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand ) Further reading [ edit ] Caldwell, Cheryl (1984).

Truby King and Seacliff Asylum 1889-1907 (BA(Hons)). Dunedin: University of Otago.

hdl : 10523/2759 .

Holloway, Judith Anne (1991).

"Unfortunate folk" : a study of the social context of committal to Seacliff Asylum 1928-1937 (BA(Hons)). Dunedin: University of Otago.

hdl : 10523/2822 .

v t e Hospitals in New Zealand Public Auckland City Christchurch Dunedin Middlemore North Shore Palmerston North Starship Waikato Wakari Wellington Waitakere Whakatane Private Braemar Southern Cross Auckland Surgical Centre Southern Cross Hospital North Harbour Defunct Auckland Adventist Cherry Farm Cornwall Karitane Karori Lunatic Asylum Kingseat Lake Alice Mount View Lunatic Asylum Porirua Lunatic Asylum Princess Margaret Pukeora Sanatorium Seacliff Lunatic Asylum Seaview Asylum St Helens Sunnyside Tokanui Psychiatric Whau Lunatic Asylum Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Seacliff_Lunatic_Asylum&oldid=1298052685 " Categories : Reportedly haunted locations in New Zealand Hospital buildings completed in 1884 Psychiatric hospitals in New Zealand Buildings and structures in Dunedin Defunct hospitals in New Zealand Hospitals established in 1884 Houses completed in 1884 1973 disestablishments History of Dunedin Robert Lawson buildings 1942 in New Zealand 1880s architecture in New Zealand December 1942 in Oceania 1940s in Dunedin Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2021 Use New Zealand English from December 2012 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2007 Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 30 June 2025, at 06:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Seacliff Lunatic Asylum 1 language Add topic

