Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work Toggle Work subsection 2.1 The commentaries: Greek texts 2.2 Latin translations 2.3 English translations 3 Notes Toggle the table of contents Michael of Ephesus 8 languages Català Ελληνικά Français مصرى Polski Русский Suomi Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Michael of Ephesus Born 1090 Ephesus Died 1155?

[ citation needed ] Nationality Byzantine Greek Scientific career Institutions University of Constantinople Doctoral advisor Eustratius of Nicaea Michael of Ephesus or Michael Ephesius ( Ancient Greek : Μιχαήλ Ἐφέσιος ; fl. early or mid-12th century AD) wrote important commentaries on Aristotle , including the first full commentary on the Sophistical Refutations , which established the regular study of that text.

[ 1 ] Life [ edit ] Little is known about Michael's life. He worked in the philosophy college, of the University of Constantinople . Together with Eustratius of Nicaea , he was part of a circle organized by Anna Comnena .

[ 2 ] As Michael suggests at the end of his Parva Naturalia commentary, his goal was to provide coverage of texts in the Corpus Aristotelicum that had been neglected by earlier commentators; [ 3 ] this was "part of a cooperative scholarly undertaking conceived and guided by Anna Comnena." [ 4 ] The fanciful suggestion that the Aristotelian commentator was none other than Michael VII Doukas , making good on his tuition under Michael Psellos (who was apparently not Michael of Ephesus' teacher) and turning after his abdication to scholarship as the archbishop of Ephesus, is no longer taken seriously.

Work [ edit ] Michael's breadth is remarkable, and his interpretive method has been compared to that of Alexander of Aphrodisias ; the commentary on Metaphysics Books 7-14 attributed to Alexander is considered to be his work.

[ 5 ] Michael's commentaries draw on Neoplatonist ideas and on the exegetical tradition of Stephen of Alexandria .  At times they allude to contemporary Byzantine matters and include criticism of the emperor and of the current state of education.

The commentaries: Greek texts [ edit ] On Sophistical Refutations : Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca II.3 On Generation of Animals : CAG XIV.3 On Nicomachean Ethics , books 9-10: CAG XX On Parva Naturalia : CAG XXII.1 On Parts of Animals , Movement of Animals , Progression of Animals : CAG XXII.2 On Nicomachean Ethics , book 5: CAG XXII.3 Michael's commentary on the pseudo-Aristotelian On Colors remains unedited, and his commentary on Politics survives only in part.

[ 5 ] Latin translations [ edit ] James of Venice may have collected texts from Michael's workshop for translation into Latin .

[ 2 ] The composite collection of commentaries including Michael's commentaries on the Nicomachean Ethics was translated into Latin by Robert Grosseteste , and again by Giovanni Bernardo Feliciano (Venice 1541).

[ 6 ] English translations [ edit ] Aristotle and  Michael of Ephesus on the Movement and Progression of Animals , trans. Anthony Preus, Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1981.

ISBN 978-3487070735 .

Aspasius, Anonymous, Michael of Ephesus, On Aristotle: Nicomachean Ethics 8 and 9 , trans. David Konstan, Duckworth, 2001.

ISBN 978-1780939100 .

Ephesus, Michael of; Themistios (2020).

On Aristotle: Nicomachean Ethics 10 . Translated by Wilberding, James; Trompeter, Julia; Rigolio, Alberto. New York: Bloomsbury Academic.

ISBN 978-1350170919 .

OCLC 1353217951 .

276 pages.

Notes [ edit ] ^ A.C. Lloyd, review of S. Ebbesen, Commentators and commentaries on Aristotle's Sophistici elenchi (Leiden: Brill, 1981), Journal of Hellenic Studies 106 (1986), pp. 231-233 ^ a b Richard Sorabji , "Aristotle Commentators," Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy , 1998, 2002 ^ CAG XXII.1 p. 149 , cited by Hans B. Gottschalk, "The Earliest Aristotelian Commentators," in Sorabji (ed.), Aristotle Transformed (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1990), p. 68 n. 67 ^ R. Browning, "An Unpublished Funeral Oration on Anna Comnena," Proceedings of the Cambridge Philological Society n.s. 8 (1962) ^ a b Katerina Ierodiakonou and Börje Bydén, "Byzantine Philosophy," Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , 2008 ^ H.P.F. Mercken, "The Greek Commentators on Aristotle's Ethics ," in Sorabji (ed.), Aristotle Transformed , pp. 407-410 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Spain Netherlands 2 Norway Greece Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Michael_of_Ephesus&oldid=1282985454 " Categories : 12th-century Greek philosophers Greek-language commentators on Aristotle 12th-century Byzantine writers Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 Articles with hCards Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 29 March 2025, at 19:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Michael of Ephesus 8 languages Add topic

