Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Academics Toggle Academics subsection 1.1 Curriculum 2 Student life 3 Chapel 4 Library 5 Massachusetts Campus 6 Notable alumni 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Thomas Aquinas College 3 languages Français مصرى 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 34°25′48″N 119°05′13″W ﻿ / ﻿ 34.430°N 119.087°W ﻿ / 34.430; -119.087 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Catholic liberal arts college in California, U.S.

For other schools named after St. Thomas Aquinas, see Institutions named after Thomas Aquinas .

This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Thomas Aquinas College" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Thomas Aquinas College Motto Fides Quarens Intellectum ( Latin ) Motto in English "Faith Seeking Understanding" Type Private liberal arts college Established 1971 Accreditation WASC Religious affiliation Catholic President Paul J. O'Reilly Academic staff 46 [ 1 ] Undergraduates 439 [ 1 ] Location Santa Paula , California , United States 34°25′48″N 119°05′13″W ﻿ / ﻿ 34.430°N 119.087°W ﻿ / 34.430; -119.087 Campus Rural, 845 acres (3.42 km 2 ) Other campuses Northfield, MA Colors Maroon & black Website www .thomasaquinas .edu Thomas Aquinas College is a private , conservative , [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Catholic liberal arts college in Santa Paula, California . It was established in 1971.

Academics [ edit ] The Chapel To ensure institutional autonomy, the college does not accept funding from either the federal government or the Catholic Church. Rather, the college relies upon private donations to provide its need-based scholarships.

[ 4 ] [ dead link ] The college does not provide merit-based scholarships.

Curriculum [ edit ] Thomas Aquinas College offers one degree, a Bachelor of Arts in liberal arts.

[ 5 ] This is an integrated liberal arts curriculum made up primarily of the Great Books , with the order of learning emphasized in the structure of the curriculum.

The college replaces textbooks with the original sources, which are the seminal works of each discipline.

[ 6 ] Thomas Aquinas College acknowledges that not all of the texts in its program are of equal weight: some are viewed as masterworks while others are studied as sources of opinions that "either lead students to the truth or make the truth more evident by opposition to it." [ 7 ] Student life [ edit ] Three chaplain-priests reside on campus and provide the Sacraments as well as spiritual direction .

[ 8 ] Intramural sports are practiced throughout the year and include volleyball, soccer, football, basketball, ultimate frisbee, and baseball. The St. John Paul II athletic center is home to both male and female exercise rooms, a climbing wall , a lap swimming pool, outdoor tennis and basketball courts, and an indoor gymnasium. The athletic center is the newest building on the California campus, opening its doors in early 2022.

[ 9 ] The St. Genesius Players produce one play a year, commonly a selection from Shakespeare .

[ 10 ] The College Choir presents an annual concert and a spring musical, often a production of Gilbert and Sullivan .

[ citation needed ] The choir sings at Sunday Mass as well as special events. A second student choir, often joined by various instrumentalists and vocalists from the student body, performs at formal and informal events throughout the year.

Unmarried students are housed on campus in six dormitories. Married students may live off-campus. Men's and women's residence halls are off-limits to members of the opposite sex.

[ 11 ] The possession or use of alcohol or illegal drugs on campus or in the dormitories is prohibited and may entail expulsion from the college.

[ 11 ] Chapel [ edit ] The Chapel As the "crown jewel" of the Thomas Aquinas College campus, Our Lady of the Most Holy Trinity Chapel was dedicated on March 7, 2009.

[ 12 ] The design for this 15,000-square-foot (1,400 m 2 ), $23 million building employs Early Christian , Renaissance , and Spanish Mission styles.

[ 13 ] Designed by the New Classical architect Duncan Stroik , it is cruciform in shape and features both a 135-foot (41 m) bell tower and an 89-foot (27 m) dome.

[ 14 ] Pope John Paul II blessed the chapel's plans in 2003, and in 2008, Pope Benedict XVI blessed its cornerstone.

Adoremus Bulletin has called Our Lady of the Most Holy Trinity Chapel "A Triumph of Sacred Architecture".

[ 15 ] Library [ edit ] The ceiling of the college's Saint Bernardine of Siena Library has a 17th-century Spanish monastery artesonado . The library has a collection of rarities including thousands-year-old Hittite seals and devotional and sacred objects of saints.

[ citation needed ] [ 16 ] The library is home to some 65,900 works.

[ 1 ] Massachusetts Campus [ edit ] Beginning in the Fall 2019 semester, Thomas Aquinas College has operated on an additional campus in Northfield, Massachusetts . Both campuses are under the authority of the same board of governors and follow the same curriculum. The New England campus formerly belonged to Northfield Mount Hermon School , a preparatory school that moved to another campus in 2005 and was given to Thomas Aquinas College in 2017 by the National Christian Foundation .

[ 17 ] The campus is located near the Connecticut River and includes 100 acres of land.

Notable alumni [ edit ] John Berg (1993), Superior General of the Priestly Fraternity of Saint Peter Peter Kwasniewski (1994), traditionalist Catholic writer and composer of sacred music.

Mary Neumayr (1986), chairman of the White House Council on Environmental Quality [ 18 ] Paul J. O'Reilly (1984), academic and current president of Thomas Aquinas College Pia de Solenni (1993), theologian who formerly served as the chancellor of the Diocese of Orange References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Fact Sheet | Thomas Aquinas College" . Retrieved July 30, 2023 .

^ "CatholicVote Touts TAC as Having "Most Conservative Students" " .

Thomas Aquinas College . Retrieved January 29, 2025 .

^ "Young America's Foundation Names College a "Top Conservative College" " .

Thomas Aquinas College . Retrieved January 29, 2025 .

^ "Financial Aid" . Thomas Aquinas College . Retrieved April 1, 2009 .

^ "Degree" . Thomas Aquinas College . Retrieved April 1, 2009 .

^ "Great Books" . Thomas Aquinas College . Retrieved April 3, 2009 .

^ "Curriculum" . Thomas Aquinas College . Retrieved April 3, 2009 .

^ "Chaplains" . Thomas Aquinas College . Retrieved January 13, 2018 .

^ "Athletics" .

Thomas Aquinas College . Retrieved December 9, 2022 .

^ "Theater" . Thomas Aquinas College . Retrieved January 13, 2018 .

^ a b "Rules of Residence" . Thomas Aquinas College . Retrieved February 5, 2016 .

^ "News" .

Ventura County Star . Archived from the original on July 17, 2011 . Retrieved January 13, 2010 .

^ "Chapel" . Thomas Aquinas College . Retrieved January 12, 2010 .

^ "A Sign of Contradiction" . Inside the Vatican. Archived from the original on June 14, 2010 . Retrieved January 13, 2010 .

^ "Chapel" . Adoremus Bulletin . Retrieved January 14, 2010 .

^ "St. Bernardine of Siena Library" .

Thomas Aquinas College . July 7, 2011 . Retrieved October 9, 2020 .

^ "Thomas Aquinas College gets green light for New England campus" .

Ventura County Star . Retrieved July 30, 2019 .

^ "Mary Bridget Neumayr ('86) Confirmed to top White House Environmental Post" . Thomas Aquinas College.

External links [ edit ] Official website Wikimedia Commons has media related to Thomas Aquinas College .

v t e Colleges and universities of Ventura County Two-year Moorpark College Oxnard College Santa Barbara Business College Ventura College Four-year Biola University, Thousand Oaks Campus Brandeis-Bardin Institute Brooks Institute California Lutheran University CSU Channel Islands Thomas Aquinas College National University, Camarillo Campus University of La Verne, Ventura County Campus Graduate-only St. John's Seminary Southern California Institute of Law The Colleges of Law v t e The Newman Guide to Choosing a Catholic College Catholic universities and colleges in the United States Aquinas College Ave Maria University Belmont Abbey College Benedictine College Catholic International University Catholic University of America Christendom College Franciscan University of Steubenville Holy Apostles College and Seminary John Paul the Great Catholic University Thomas Aquinas College Thomas More College of Liberal Arts University of Dallas University of Mary University of St. Thomas Walsh University Wyoming Catholic College v t e Education in the Archdiocese of Los Angeles Archdiocese Seminaries St. John's Seminary Our Lady of the Angels Pastoral Region Universities and colleges Loyola Marymount University Mount St. Mary's University High schools Bishop Conaty-Our Lady of Loretto HS, Harvard Heights Cathedral HS (Boys) Immaculate Heart HS, Los Feliz (Girls) Loyola HS, Harvard Heights (Boys) Marymount HS, Bel Air (Girls) Notre Dame Acad. (Girls) St. Bernard HS, Playa del Rey St. Mary's Acad., Inglewood (Girls) St. Monica Preparatory, Santa Monica Verbum Dei Jesuit HS, Watts (Boys) High schools, closed Daniel Murphy HS, Los Angeles Mount Carmel HS, Los Angeles San Fernando Pastoral Region High schools Bishop Alemany HS, Mission Hills Chaminade HS, West Hills Crespi Carmelite HS, Encino Flintridge Sacred Heart Acad., La Cañada Flintridge Louisville HS, Woodland Hills Notre Dame HS, Sherman Oaks Paraclete HS, Lancaster Providence HS, Burbank St. Francis HS, La Cañada Flintridge St. Genevieve HS, Panorama City High schools, closed Bellarmine-Jefferson HS, Burbank Our Lady of Corvallis HS, Studio City Holy Family HS, Glendale St. John Paul II STEM Acad., Burbank Villa Cabrini Acad., Burbank San Gabriel Pastoral Region High schools Ramona Convent Sec., Alhambra St. Lucy's Priory HS, Glendora Bishop Amat Memorial HS, La Puente Damien HS, La Verne Salesian HS, Los Angeles Cantwell-Sacred Heart of Mary HS, Montebello La Salle College Prep., Pasadena Mayfield Senior, Pasadena St. Monica Acad., Montrose Pomona Catholic HS, Pomona San Gabriel Mission HS, San Gabriel Alverno Heights Acad., Sierra Madre (formerly Alverno HS) San Pedro Pastoral Region High schools St. John Bosco HS, Bellflower St. Pius X-St. Matthias Acad., Downey Junipero Serra HS, Gardena St. Joseph High School, Lakewood St. Anthony HS, Long Beach Don Bosco HS, Rosemead Mary Star of the Sea HS, San Pedro St. Paul HS, Santa Fe Springs Bishop Montgomery HS, Torrance Universities and colleges, closed Marymount College, Palos Verdes High schools, closed Queen of Angels Acad., Compton Santa Barbara Pastoral Region Universities and colleges St. John's Seminary, Camarillo Thomas Aquinas College, Santa Paula High schools Bishop García Diego HS, Santa Barbara La Reina HS, Thousand Oaks St. Bonaventure HS, Ventura St. Joseph HS, Santa Maria Santa Clara HS, Oxnard Villanova Prep., Ojai v t e International Council of Universities in the Spirit of Saint Thomas Aquinas Africa Universidade Católica de Angola Ethiopian Catholic University of Saint Thomas Aquinas Universidade São Tomás de Moçambique Catholic University of Nigeria Americas Universidad Católica Argentina Universidad Fraternidad de Agrupaciones Santo Tomás de Aquino Ohio Dominican University Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú Pontificia Universidad Católica Madre y Maestra Universidad Santo Tomás (Bogotá) Universidad Santo Tomás (Chile) Universidad Santo Tomás (Honduras) Universidad del Norte Santo Tomás de Aquino Saint Thomas University Thomas Aquinas College University of Saint Thomas (Texas) University of Saint Thomas (Minnesota) Asia-Pacific Australian Catholic University University of Notre Dame Australia Pontifical and Royal University of Santo Tomás, Manila University of Santo Tomas–Legazpi Sei Katarina Daigaku Sei Tomasu Daigaku Universitas Katolik St. Thomas Sumatera Utara Europe Institut catholique d’études supérieures Facultà di Teología di Lugano Mary Immaculate College Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas CEU San Pablo University CEU Abat Oliba University CEU Cardinal Herrera University Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thomas_Aquinas_College&oldid=1303022660 " Categories : 1971 establishments in California Catholic universities and colleges in California Catholic universities and colleges in Massachusetts Conservative organizations in the United States Liberal arts colleges in California Liberal arts colleges in Massachusetts Santa Paula, California Schools accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges Northfield, Massachusetts Universities and colleges established in 1971 Universities and colleges in Ventura County, California Universities and colleges in Franklin County, Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from January 2025 All articles lacking reliable references Use mdy dates from October 2024 Articles containing Latin-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2010 Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 18:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Thomas Aquinas College 3 languages Add topic

