Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classification Toggle Classification subsection 1.1 Subclasses 2 Dynamics 3 Mesoscale boundaries 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Mesoscale meteorology 17 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Português Suomi Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Moderately sized weather phenomena A meso-beta scale vortex Mesoscale meteorology is the study of weather systems and processes at horizontal scales of approximately 5 kilometres (3 mi) to several hundred kilometres. It is smaller than synoptic-scale systems (1,000 km or larger) but larger than microscale (less than 1 km). At the small end, it includes storm-scale phenomena (the size of an individual thunderstorm [ 1 ] ). Examples of mesoscale weather systems are sea breezes , squall lines , and mesoscale convective complexes .

Vertical velocity often equals or exceeds horizontal velocities in mesoscale meteorological systems due to nonhydrostatic processes such as buoyant acceleration of a rising thermal or acceleration through a narrow mountain pass.

Classification [ edit ] Mesoscale meteorology studies weather systems like thunderstorm clusters too small to be resolved by the earliest weather observation networks.

The earliest networks of weather observations in the late 1800s and early 1900s could detect the movement and evolution of larger, synoptic-scale systems like high and low-pressure areas. However, smaller and potentially hazardous meteorological phenomena were not well-captured by the sparse observation networks. The emergence of weather radar in the mid-1900s and an improved understanding of thunderstorm behavior led to an increased recognition of a need to study phenomena between the scales studied in the extant disciplines of microscale and synoptic-scale meteorology.

[ 2 ] The term "mesoscale" originated from M. G. H. Ligda at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , who suggested a need to study phenomena at such scales in 1951: [ 2 ] [ 3 ] It is anticipated that radar will provide useful information concerning the structure and behavior of that portion of the atmosphere which is not covered by either micro- or synoptic-meteorological studies. We have already observed with radar that precipitation formulations which are undoubtedly of significance occur on a scale too gross to be observed from a single station, yet too small to appear even on sectional synoptic charts. Phenomena of this size might well be designated as mesometeorological.

— M. G. H. Ligda, "Radar Storm Observation", Compendium of Meteorology (1951) [ 4 ] Subclasses [ edit ] Mesoscale meteorology broadly concerns meteorological phenomena larger than a few kilometres across but smaller than could be resolved by the observation networks used in the earliest standardized weather maps .

[ 5 ] The mesoscale regime is often divided into these subclasses based on the size of associated weather systems: [ 6 ] Meso-alpha (meso-α) – 200–2000 km scale of phenomena like fronts , squall lines , mesoscale convective systems (MCS), tropical cyclones at the smaller edge of synoptic scale .

[ 6 ] Meso-beta (meso-β) –  20–200 km scale of phenomena like mesocyclones , sea breezes , and lake effect snow storms.

[ 6 ] Mesocale often refers to meso-β scale specifically.

[ 7 ] Meso-gamma (meso-γ) –  2–20 km scale of phenomena like thunderstorm convection , complex terrain flows (at the larger edge of microscale ) As a note, tropical and subtropical cyclones are classified by National Hurricane Center as synoptic scale rather than mesoscale.

[ 8 ] Features the size of an individual thunderstorm are also known somewhat informally as "storm-scale", typically meso-gamma but sometimes meso-beta [ 9 ] or microscale .

Dynamics [ edit ] Vertical motion is prominent in many mesoscale processes.

Mesoscale processes are characterized by having a relatively large Rossby number compared to synoptic scale processes. Thus, over shorter distances as implicated in mesoscale phenomena, the importance of geostrophic balance and the Earth's rotation in shaping atmospheric processes is small relative to synoptic-scale phenomena.

[ 10 ] This is particularly true towards the smaller end of the mesoscale range.

[ 11 ] : 8 Because the curvature of Earth is small at mesoscales, the physical models used to diagnose mesoscale phenomena often assume a constant Coriolis frequency .

[ 10 ] Nonetheless, the Coriolis force is non-negligible and comparable to the influence of atmospheric buoyancy .

[ 7 ] Large-scale turbulence and eddies also play a large role in mesoscale meteorology.

[ 10 ] The vertical movement of air (often expressed as omega ) is larger at mesoscale than at synoptic scales, and the distribution of air pressure tends to be influenced by the behavior of winds at the mesoscale (as opposed to the converse at synoptic scales).

[ 7 ] For many mesoscale phenomena, the vertical acceleration of air is sufficiently large enough that calculations cannot assume hydrostatic balance . This is often true of phenomena with a vertical dimension roughly equal to their horizontal dimensions.

[ 11 ] : 9 Mesoscale boundaries [ edit ] As in synoptic frontal analysis , mesoscale analysis uses cold, warm, and occluded fronts on the mesoscale to help describe phenomena.  On weather maps mesoscale fronts are depicted as smaller and with twice as many bumps or spikes as the synoptic variety.  In the United States , opposition to the use of the mesoscale versions of fronts on weather analyses, has led to the use of an overarching symbol (a trough symbol) with a label of outflow boundary as the frontal notation.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Weather portal Microscale meteorology Misoscale meteorology POLYGON experiment Surface weather analysis Synoptic scale meteorology References [ edit ] ^ NOAA Glossary entry for "Storm Scale" ^ a b Trapp, Robert J. (2013).

Mesoscale-Convective Processes in the Atmosphere . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-88942-1 .

^ Fujita 1986 , p. 23.

^ Ligda, Myron G. H. (1951). "Radar Storm Observation".

Compendium of Meteorology . pp.

1265– 1282.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-940033-70-9_103 .

ISBN 978-1-940033-70-9 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Markowski, Paul; Richardson, Yvette (2010).

Mesoscale Meteorology in Midlatitudes . Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-0-470-74213-6 .

^ a b c Orlanski, I.

(1975).

"A rational subdivision of scales for atmospheric processes" (PDF) .

Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society .

56 (5): 527– 530.

^ a b c Shou, Shaowen; Li, Shenshen; Shou, Yixuan; Yao, Xiuping (2023).

An Introduction to Mesoscale Meteorology . Singapore: Springer Nature Singapore.

doi : 10.1007/978-981-19-8606-2 .

ISBN 978-981-19-8605-5 .

S2CID 257624656 .

^ "Glossary of NHC Terms" .

^ David Babb; Lee M. Grenci (2019).

"Subdividing the Mesoscale" .

The Pennsylvania State University .

^ a b c Parker, D.J. (2015). "Mesoscale Meteorology | Overview".

Encyclopedia of Atmospheric Sciences . pp.

316– 322.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-382225-3.00478-3 .

ISBN 978-0-12-382225-3 .

^ a b Markowski, Paul; Richardson, Yvette (2010).

Mesoscale meteorology in midlatitudes . Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-0-470-74213-6 .

^ Roth, David.

"Unified Surface Analysis Manual" (PDF) . Hydrometeorological Prediction Center . Retrieved 2006-10-24 .

Fujita, T.T.

(1986). "Mesoscale classifications: their history and their application to forecasting". In Ray, P.S. (ed.).

Mesoscale Meteorology and Forecasting . Boston: American Meteorological Society. pp.

18– 35.

v t e Cyclones and anticyclones of the world ( centers of action ) Concepts Anticyclonic storm Storm High-pressure area Low-pressure area Rapid intensification Explosive cyclogenesis Central dense overcast Annular tropical cyclone Bar (tropical cyclone) Superstorm Hypercane Tropical cyclones and climate change Post-tropical cyclone Sting jet List Rainband Anticyclone Northern Hemisphere North Polar High Siberian High Azores High North American High North Pacific High Ridiculously Resilient Ridge Subtropical ridge Southern Hemisphere South Polar High South Atlantic High South Pacific High Kalahari High Australian High Subtropical ridge Cyclone Synoptic scale Surface-based Polar North Polar low South Polar low Great Arctic Cyclone of 2012 Extratropical North America Continental Lee Cyclone Alberta clipper Colorado low Great Basin low Bighorn Low Other Panhandle hook November gale Oceanic Aleutian Low Hatteras low Nor'easter Gulf low Pacific Northwest windstorm Europe Icelandic Low Genoa low European windstorm Asia Asiatic Low Western Disturbance Continental North Asian storms East Asian-northwest Pacific storms Southern Hemisphere Southern Ocean cyclone Sudestada Subtropical Kona storm Australian east coast low Black nor'easter Lake Huron cyclone Mediterranean tropical-like cyclone Thermal Tropical ( Outline ) Northern Hemisphere Atlantic hurricane Cape Verde hurricane Pacific hurricane Typhoon North Indian Ocean tropical cyclone Mediterranean tropical-like cyclone Black Sea tropical-like cyclone Southern Hemisphere South-West Indian Ocean tropical cyclone Australian region tropical cyclone South Pacific tropical cyclone South Atlantic tropical cyclone Upper level Cold-core low Cut-off low Polar vortex Upper tropospheric cyclonic vortex Mesoscale Mesoscale ocean eddies Catalina eddy Haida Eddies Mesoscale convective system Wake Low Mesohigh Mesoscale convective vortex Line echo wave pattern Whirlwind Major Mesocyclone Supercell Low-topped supercell Wall cloud Funnel cloud Tornado Multiple-vortex tornado Satellite tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Minor Gustnado Dust devil Steam devil Fire whirl Tropical cyclones portal Tornadoes portal Authority control databases Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mesoscale_meteorology&oldid=1302153572 " Category : Mesoscale meteorology Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 18:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mesoscale meteorology 17 languages Add topic

