Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Imprints Toggle Imprints subsection 2.1 Abrams Books 2.2 Abrams Appleseed 2.3 Abrams Books for Young Readers 2.4 Abrams ComicArts 2.5 Abrams Image 2.6 Abrams Noterie 2.7 Abrams Press 2.8 Amulet Books 2.9 Amulet Paperbacks 3 Defunct imprints Toggle Defunct imprints subsection 3.1 Stewart, Tabori & Chang 4 References Toggle the table of contents Abrams Books 6 languages Español فارسی Français Frysk Português Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Harry N. Abrams, Inc.

) American publisher of books and stationery Abrams Books Parent company Média-Participations Founded November 3, 1949 ; 75 years ago ( 1949-11-03 ) Founder Harry N. Abrams Country of origin United States Headquarters location New York City Distribution Hachette Client Services [ 1 ] Key people Mary McAveney (President; CEO) Publication types Books , stationery Nonfiction topics Art , photography , cooking , craft , comics , interior design , garden design , entertainment , fashion , popular culture Imprints Abrams Books, Abrams Appleseed, Abrams Books for Young Readers, Abrams ComicArts, Abrams Image, Abrams Noterie, Abrams Press, Amulet Books, Amulet Paperbacks, The Overlook Press Official website www .abramsbooks .com Abrams , formerly Harry N. Abrams, Inc.

( HNA ), is an American publisher of art and illustrated books , children's books , and stationery.

The enterprise is a subsidiary of the French publisher Média-Participations . Run by president and CEO Mary McAveney, Abrams publishes and distributes approximately 250 titles annually and has more than 3,000 titles in print.

Abrams also distributes publications for the Victoria and Albert Museum , Tate , Vendome Press (in North America), Booth Clibborn Editions, SelfMadeHero , MoMA Children's Books, and 5 Continents.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Founded by Harry N. Abrams in 1949, Abrams was the first company in the United States to specialize in the creation and distribution of art books.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Times Mirror Company acquired the company in 1966 and Harry Abrams retired in 1977. For many years, the company was under the direction of Paul Gottlieb (publisher) until January 2001, eighteen months before his death.

[ 5 ] Abrams was acquired by La Martinière Groupe in 1997.

[ 4 ] La Martinière was acquired by Média-Participations in 2018.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] In 2018, Abrams acquired The Overlook Press .

[ 8 ] In 2020, Abrams acquired Cameron + Company.

[ 9 ] Abrams acquired Taunton Press from Active Interest Media in May 2024.

[ 10 ] Imprints [ edit ] Abrams Books [ edit ] Abrams publishes illustrated books on the subjects of art, photography, performing arts, fashion, interior design , and nature and science.  Titles published by Abrams include The Art of Walt Disney , [ 11 ] Earth from Above , I'm a Born Liar: A Fellini Lexicon , Louis Vuitton: The Birth of Modern Luxury , The Diary of Frida Kahlo , Yoshitomo Nara: Nobody's Fool , The Wes Anderson Collection , The Selby Is in Your Place , Abrams Discoveries , and Vanity Fair 100 Years (about the two U.S. magazines: 1913-1936 and from 1983 onward ).

[ 12 ] Abrams Appleseed [ edit ] Founded in 2012, Abrams Appleseed publishes board books, novelty books, and picture books for children up to age 5.

[ 13 ] The imprint's list of titles includes Alphablocks , Hippopposites , Pantone: Color , In My Heart , and the Mini Myths series.

Abrams Books for Young Readers [ edit ] Abrams Books for Young Readers publishes picture books and illustrated nonfiction for preschool through middle-grade readers.  The imprint's list of titles includes Library Mouse , Rosie Revere, Engineer , I Am Yoga , Animalia , Babar's Museum of Art , Separate Is Never Equal , Maritcha , and 365 Penguins .

[ 14 ] Abrams ComicArts [ edit ] Abrams ComicArts was founded in 2009 under the editorial direction of Charles Kochman [ 15 ] and publishes graphic novels and illustrated books about the creators and the history of comics art, animation, and cartoons. Its titles include Mom's Cancer , Kirby: King of Comics , My Friend Dahmer , The Simpsons Futurama Crossover Crisis , R. Crumb's Heroes of Blues, Jazz & Country , and The Art of Rube Goldberg . In the 2010s, it also began publishing volumes compiling reproduction of vintage trading card series for franchises such as Star Trek . In 2024, the imprint will become a full division of the company and also begin licensing manga and other international comic books.

[ 16 ] Art Director Chad W. Beckerman 2009-2018 Abrams Image [ edit ] Abrams Image was launched in 2006 and publishes illustrated and non-illustrated books on music, humor, fashion, and popular culture. The imprint's titles include Plato and a Platypus Walk Into a Bar , Tim Gunn: A Guide to Quality, Taste & Style , Understand Rap , CBGB & OMFUG , The Steampunk Bible , Paris Street Style , Sh*tty Mom , and Cupcakes and Cashmere .

[ 17 ] Abrams Noterie [ edit ] Abrams Noterie is a gift and stationery imprint that collaborates with authors, artists, and brands to make paper goods. Recent publications include Paris Street Style , The Kings County Distillery: Whiskey Notes , Hyperbole and a Half , Daily Dishonesty , and The Forest Feast gift and stationery collections.

[ 18 ] Abrams Press [ edit ] Abrams Press publishes narrative non-fiction works relating to arts and culture, food, style, design, history, current events, science, technology, memoir, and biography. Titles include Grocery: The Buying and Selling of Food in America , [ 19 ] Unprotected by Billy Porter , Soulless: The Case Against R. Kelly by Jim DeRogatis , The Sopranos Sessions by Matt Zoller Seitz and Alan Sepinwall .

Amulet Books [ edit ] Amulet Books publishes novels, graphic novels, and nonfiction for young adults and middle-grade readers. The imprint has published many bestselling and award-winning books, including Jeff Kinney 's Diary of a Wimpy Kid series , [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Heart of a Samurai , Cece Bell 's El Deafo , Tom Angleberger 's Origami Yoda series, and Michael Buckley 's Sisters Grimm and NERDS series.

Amulet Paperbacks [ edit ] Amulet Paperbacks publishes original titles as well as reprints. Books published by Amulet Paperbacks include Lauren Myracle 's Internet Girls series , A. G. Howard's Splintered series , Jesse Andrews 's Me and Earl and the Dying Girl , and Jonathan Auxier 's The Night Gardener .

Defunct imprints [ edit ] Stewart, Tabori & Chang [ edit ] Stewart, Tabori & Chang (ST&C), a publisher of cookbooks and craft titles, was purchased by Abrams in the late 1990s. In what CEO Michael Jacobs described in 2016 as a "unification strategy", all reprinted ST&C titles will appear under Abrams' other existing imprints. In addition, a new corporate logo was rolled out simultaneously.

[ 12 ] References [ edit ] ^ Hachette – Our Clients ^ "Abrams website" . Abramsbooks.com . Retrieved April 16, 2017 .

^ Harry N. Abrams interview , 1972 March 14, Archives of American Art , Smithsonian Institution ^ a b "TIMES MIRROR TO SELL HARRY N. ABRAMS UNIT" , The New York Times , March 11, 1997 ^ Paul Gottlieb, Longtime Publisher of Art Books, Dies at 67 , The New York Times , June 6, 2002.

^ "French publishers la Martiniere, Media-Participations hold merger talks" .

Reuters . September 21, 2017.

^ "Willkie Advises la Martinière Groupe in its Combination with Média-Participations | News | Willkie Farr & Gallagher LLP" .

^ "Abrams Acquires Peter Mayer's the Overlook Press" .

PublishersWeekly.com . Retrieved October 14, 2018 .

^ "Abrams Acquires Cameron + Company" .

^ Cader, Michael (May 15, 2024).

"Abrams Acquires Taunton Press" .

Publishers Lunch . Retrieved May 16, 2024 .

^ "The New York Times Bookk Review (Published 1973)" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 6, 2023.

^ a b Jim Milliot (May 4, 2016).

"Abrams Dropping Stewart, Tabori & Chang Name" .

Publishers Weekly . PWxyz, LLC . Retrieved August 13, 2019 .

^ Abrams Unveils Appleseed Books Imprint ^ Andrew Smith to Head Children's Books at Abrams ^ Reid, Calvin (July 26, 2008).

"Kochman To Head New Abrams Comics Imprint" . Publishers Weekly . Retrieved February 20, 2022 .

^ Pineda, Rafael Antonio (April 5, 2023).

"Abrams ComicArts to Begin Publishing Manga in Fall 2024" .

Anime News Network . Retrieved April 5, 2023 .

^ A Re-energized Abrams ^ Abrams Plus to Launch with Jess Brallier at Helm ^ Abrams Press's First Title Due in May ^ Kids' Choice Award 2009 , winners list ^ Between the Lines: 'Kid' Rocks , The rise of "Diary of a Wimpy Kid," Entertainment Weekly , May 2, 2008 ^ Kids' Lit Gets Graphic , Two surprise best sellers may herald a young-adult revolution, New York Magazine , April 13, 2008 ^ Crossover Dreams:: Turning Free Web Work Into Real Book Sales , The New York Times , December 13, 2007 ^ 'Wimpy Kid' Keeps Kids of All Ages in Stitches , NPR, "All Things Considered," February 2, 2008 ^ 'Wimpy Kid' bullies its way to big success , USA Today , January 27, 2008 ^ Resorting to humor, and petty larceny , The Boston Globe , May 20, 2007 v t e Comic book publishers in North America Active Aardvark-Vanaheim Abrams ComicArts AC Comics Action Lab Comics Ahoy Comics AiT/Planet Lar Alias Enterprises Alien Books Alternative Comics Antarctic Press Arcana Studio Archaia Entertainment Archie Comics Aspen MLT Avatar Press AWA Studios Beyond Comics Black Eye Productions Black Mask Studios Black Sands Entertainment Boom! Studios Caliber Comics Class Comics Comic House Conundrum Press Creative Impulse Entertainment Cross Infinite World Darby Pop Publishing Dark Horse Comics DC Comics Milestone Media Vertigo Comics Denpa Devil's Due Publishing Drawn & Quarterly DSTLRY Dynamite Entertainment Eureka Productions Fantagraphics First Second Books HarperCollins Hermes Press Humanoids Publishing Hyperwerks IDW Publishing Sunday Press Books Image Comics Skybound Entertainment Iron Circus Comics J-Novel Club Kaiten Books Kodansha USA Vertical Koyama Press La Pastèque Last Gasp Legendary Comics Lev Gleason Publications Les 400 coups The Library of American Comics Mad Cave Studios Papercutz Marvel Comics Moonstone Books MyFutprint Entertainment NBM Publishing Northwest Press Oni Press Panini Comics Platinum Studios Radical Comics Radio Comix Red 5 Comics Rip Off Press Seven Seas Entertainment Shadowline Slave Labor Graphics Sumerian Comics TidalWave Productions Titan Comics TKO Studios Tokyopop Top Cow Productions Udon Entertainment Valiant Comics Vault Comics Viz Media Vortex Comics WaRP Graphics WildStorm Yen Press Zenescope Entertainment Z2 Comics Former Aircel Comics All-American Publications AfterShock Comics Amalgam Comics American Comics Group Anglo-American Publishing Another Rainbow Publishing Ape Entertainment Apple Comics Arcade Comics Atlas Comics Atlas/Seaboard Comics Awesome Comics Azteca Productions Bell Features Blackthorne Publishing Bongo Comics Broadway Comics Cat-Head Comics Catalan Communications Centaur Publications Chaos! Comics Charlton Comics Columbia Comics Harry "A" Chesler Comico ComicsOne ComiXology Originals Continuity Comics Continüm Comics Crestwood Publications CrossGen Dabel Brothers Productions David McKay Publications Defiant Comics Dell Comics Del Rey Manga Disney Comics Double Take Comics Dragon Lady Press Dreamwave Productions Eastern Color Printing EC Comics Eclipse Comics Eternity Comics FantaCo Enterprises Fawcett Comics Fiction House First Comics Fox Feature Syndicate Future Comics Gemstone Publishing Gilberton Gladstone Publishing Gold Key Comics Harris Comics Harvey Comics Highwater Books Hillborough Studios Hillman Periodicals Holyoke Publishing Innovation Publishing Kitchen Sink Press Lion Forge Comics Magazine Enterprises Mainline Publications Malibu Comics Maple Leaf Publishing Millennium Publications Mirage Studios National Comics Publications Nedor Publishing New Reliable Press NOW Comics Pacific Comics Pendulum Press Print Mint Quality Comics Renegade Press Revolutionary Comics Semic Comics Sirius Comics Sirius Entertainment Skywald Publications Sparkplug Comics Standard Comics Strawberry Jam Comics Street & Smith Tekno Comix Timely Comics Topps Comics Tundra Publishing Viper Comics Warren Publishing Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other MusicBrainz label Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abrams_Books&oldid=1280004706 " Categories : Publishing companies of the United States Book publishing companies based in New York City Publishing companies established in 1949 Visual arts publishing companies Abrams Books books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from July 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from July 2023 This page was last edited on 11 March 2025, at 21:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abrams Books 6 languages Add topic

