Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Hemispheric differences 2 See also 3 Further reading 4 References Toggle the table of contents Kinetic depth effect Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Phenomenon of visual perception "Kinetic illusion" redirects here. For other uses, see Autokinetic effect .

The Spinning Dancer is a kinetic, bistable optical illusion resembling a pirouetting female dancer.  The dancer can be seen to be spinning alternately one direction, or the other.

In visual perception , the kinetic depth effect is the phenomenon whereby the three-dimensional structural form of an object can be perceived when the object is moving. In the absence of other visual depth cues , this might be the only perception mechanism available to infer the object's shape. Being able to identify a structure from a motion stimulus through the human visual system was shown by Hans Wallach and O'Connell [ who?

] in the 1950s through their experiments.

[ 1 ] For example, if a shadow is cast onto a screen by a rotating wire shape , a viewer can readily perceive the shape of the structure behind the screen from the motion and deformation of the shadow.

There are two propositions as to how three-dimensional images are perceived. The experience of three-dimensional images can be caused by differences in the pattern of stimulation on the retina, in comparison to two-dimensional images. Gestalt psychologists hold the view that rules of organization must exist in accordance to the retinal projections of three-dimensional forms which happen to form three-dimensional percepts. Most retinal images of two-dimensional forms lead to two-dimensional forms in experience as well.  The other deduction is related to previous experience. However, this assumption does not explain how past experience influences perception of images.

[ 2 ] In order to model the calculation of depth values from relative movement, many efforts have been made to infer these values using other information like geometry and measurements of objects and their positions.

[ 3 ] This is related to the extraction of structure from motion in computer vision . In addition, an individual's ability to realize the kinetic depth effect conclusively shows that the visual system can independently figure the structure from motion problem.

[ 4 ] As with other depth cues, the kinetic depth effect is almost always produced in combination with other effects, most notably the motion parallax effect. For instance, the rotating circles illusion [ 5 ] and the rotating dots visualization [ 6 ] (which is similar in principle to the projected wireframe demonstration mentioned above) rely strongly on the previous knowledge that objects (or parts thereof) further from the observer appear to move more slowly than those that are closer.

The kinetic depth effect can manifest independently, however, even when motion parallax is not present. An example of such a situation is the art installment "The Analysis of Beauty", [ 7 ] by the Disinformation project, created as a tribute to William Hogarth 's concept of the Serpentine Line (which was presented in his homonymous book ).

Hemispheric differences [ edit ] Sometimes, when looking at rotating three-dimensional silhouettes, they will suddenly appear to change the direction in which they are rotating, even though nothing about the image has changed. This sudden change is because the silhouette lacks any depth cues from shading. Data from an experiment showed that subjects experienced changes more when the image was being processed by their left hemisphere which controls the right side of the visual field.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Kinetic depth effect .

Depth perception Optical illusion Structure from motion (psychophysics) Wiggle stereoscopy Further reading [ edit ] Wallach, H. & O'Connell D. N. (1953). "The Kinetic Depth Effect".

Journal of Experimental Psychology .

45 (4): 205– 217.

doi : 10.1037/h0056880 .

PMID 13052853 .

Gibson, J. J. (1966).

The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems . Houghton Mifflin.

Kauffman, L. (1974).

Sight and Mind: An introduction to visual perception . Oxford University Press.

References [ edit ] ^ Aloimonos J. On the kinetic depth effect. Biological cybernetics. 1989-01-01;60:445-55.

^ Wallach, H.; O'Connell, D. N. (1953). "The kinetic depth effect".

Journal of Experimental Psychology .

45 (4): 205– 217.

doi : 10.1037/h0056880 .

PMID 13052853 .

^ Michael S. Landy (1987).

"Parallel model of the kinetic depth effect using local computations" (PDF) .

J. Opt. Soc. Am. A .

4 (5): 864– 877.

doi : 10.1364/josaa.4.000864 .

PMID 3598740 .

^ Ullman, S. (1979). The interpretation of visual motion. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

^ Stereokinetic Phenomenon from Michael Bach’s "Optical Illusions & Visual Phenomena" ^ George Mather.

"Kinetic Depth Effect illustration" .

^ "The Analysis of Beauty" , by the Disinformation project ^ Azoulai & MacLeod, Shai & Donald.

"Hemispheric Differences in the Kinetic Depth Effect" .

Journal of Vision . Retrieved 28 July 2012 .

v t e Stereoscopy and 3D display Perception 3D stereo view Binocular rivalry Binocular vision Chromostereopsis Convergence insufficiency Correspondence problem Peripheral vision Depth perception Epipolar geometry Kinetic depth effect Stereoblindness Stereopsis Stereopsis recovery Stereoscopic acuity Vergence-accommodation conflict Display technologies Active shutter 3D system Anaglyph 3D Autostereogram Autostereoscopy Bubblegram Head-mounted display Holography Integral imaging Lenticular lens Multiscopy Parallax barrier Parallax scrolling Polarized 3D system Specular holography Stereo display Stereoscope Vectograph Virtual retinal display Volumetric display Wiggle stereoscopy Other technologies 2D to 3D conversion 2D plus Delta 2D-plus-depth Computer stereo vision Multiview Video Coding Parallax scanning Pseudoscope Stereo photography techniques Stereoautograph Stereoscopic depth rendition Stereoscopic rangefinder Stereoscopic spectroscopy Stereoscopic video coding Product types 3D camcorder 3D film 3D television 3D-enabled mobile phones 4D film Blu-ray 3D Digital 3D Stereo camera Stereo microscope Stereoscopic video game Virtual reality headset Notable products AMD HD3D Dolby 3D Fujifilm FinePix Real 3D Infitec MasterImage 3D Nintendo 3DS New 3DS Nvidia 3D Vision Panavision 3D RealD 3D Sharp Actius RD3D View-Master XpanD 3D Miscellany Stereographer Stereoscopic Displays and Applications Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kinetic_depth_effect&oldid=1264341958 " Category : Visual perception Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2023 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 21 December 2024, at 16:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kinetic depth effect Add languages Add topic

