Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Subdivisions on the basis of region Toggle Subdivisions on the basis of region subsection 2.1 Cryofauna 2.2 Cryptofauna 2.3 Epifauna 2.4 Infauna 2.5 Limnofauna 2.6 Macrofauna 2.7 Megafauna 2.8 Meiofauna 2.9 Mesofauna 2.10 Microfauna 2.11 Stygofauna 2.12 Troglofauna 2.13 Xenofauna 2.14 Other 3 Treatises Toggle Treatises subsection 3.1 Classic faunas 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Fauna 81 languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Magyar Македонски മലയാളം მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русиньскый Русский Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Fauna (animals) ) Set of animal species in any particular region and time For other uses, see Fauna (disambiguation) .

"Animal Life" redirects here. For the book, see Animal Life (book) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Fauna" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Simplified schematic of an island's fauna – all its animal species, highlighted in boxes The Fauna ( pl.

: faunae or faunas ) is the whole of animal life present in a particular region or time. The corresponding terms for plants and fungi are flora and funga , respectively. Flora, fauna, funga and other forms of life are collectively referred to as biota .

Zoologists and paleontologists use fauna to refer to a typical collection of animals found in a specific time or place, e.g. the " Sonoran Desert fauna" or the " Burgess Shale fauna".

Paleontologists sometimes refer to a sequence of faunal stages , which is a series of rocks all containing similar fossils. The study of animals of a particular region is called faunistics .

Etymology [ edit ] Fauna comes from the name Fauna , a Roman goddess of earth and fertility, the Roman god Faunus , and the related forest spirits called Fauns . All three words are cognates of the name of the Greek god Pan , and panis is the Modern Greek equivalent of fauna (πανίς or rather πανίδα).

Fauna is also the word for a book that catalogues the animals in such a manner. The term was first used by Carl Linnaeus from Sweden in the title of his 1745 [ 1 ] work Fauna Suecica .

Subdivisions on the basis of region [ edit ] Cryofauna [ edit ] Cryofauna refers to the animals that live in, or very close to, cold areas.

Cryptofauna [ edit ] Cryptofauna is the fauna that exists in protected or concealed microhabitats .

[ 2 ] Epifauna [ edit ] Epifauna, also called epibenthos , are aquatic animals that live on the bottom substratum as opposed to within it, that is, the benthic fauna that live on top of the sediment surface at the seafloor.

Infauna [ edit ] This time-lapse movie shows images taken every hour during a two-week period. Worms, bacteria and fish are shown disturbing the sediment as they burrow and move through it.

Infauna are benthic organisms that live within the bottom substratum of a water body, especially within the bottom-most oceanic sediments, the layer of small particles at the bottom of a body of water, rather than on its surface.

Bacteria and microalgae may also live in the interstices of bottom sediments. In general, infaunal animals become progressively smaller and less abundant with increasing water depth and distance from shore, whereas bacteria show more constancy in abundance, tending toward one million cells per milliliter of interstitial seawater.

Such creatures are found in the fossil record and include lingulata , trilobites and worms . They made burrows in the sediment as protection and may also have fed upon detritus or the mat of microbes which tended to grow on the surface of the sediment.

[ 3 ] Today, a variety of organisms live in and disturb the sediment . The deepest burrowers are the ghost shrimps ( Thalassinidea ), which go as deep as 3 metres (10 ft) into the sediment at the bottom of the ocean.

[ 4 ] Limnofauna [ edit ] Limnofauna refers to the animals that live in fresh water.

Macrofauna [ edit ] Macrofauna are benthic or soil organisms which are retained on a 0.5 mm sieve.  Studies in the deep sea define macrofauna as animals retained on a 0.3 mm sieve to account for the small size of many of the taxa.

Megafauna [ edit ] Main article: Megafauna Papuan , Australian and New Zealand fauna . This image was likely first published in the first edition (1876–1899) of the Nordisk familjebok .

Megafauna are large animals of any particular region or time. For example, Australian megafauna .

Meiofauna [ edit ] Main article: Meiobenthos Meiofauna are small benthic invertebrates that live in both marine and freshwater environments . The term meiofauna loosely defines a group of organisms by their 
size, larger than microfauna but smaller than macrofauna, rather than a taxonomic grouping. One environment for meiofauna is between grains of damp sand (see Mystacocarida ).

In practice these are metazoan animals that can pass unharmed through a 0.5–1 mm mesh but will be retained by a 30–45 μm mesh, [ 5 ] but the exact dimensions will vary from researcher to researcher. Whether an organism passes through a 1 mm mesh also depends upon whether it is alive or dead at the time of sorting.

Mesofauna [ edit ] Main article: Soil mesofauna Mesofauna are macroscopic soil animals such as arthropods or nematodes . Mesofauna are extremely diverse; considering just the springtails ( Collembola ), as of 1998, approximately 6,500 species had been identified.

[ 6 ] Microfauna [ edit ] Main article: Microfauna Microfauna are microscopic or very small animals (usually including protozoans and very small animals such as rotifers ). To qualify as part of the microfauna, an organism must exhibit animal-like characteristics, as opposed to microflora , which are more plant-like.

Stygofauna [ edit ] Main article: Stygofauna Stygofauna is any fauna that lives in groundwater systems or aquifers, such as caves , fissures and vugs . Stygofauna and troglofauna are the two types of subterranean fauna (based on life-history). Both are associated with subterranean environments – stygofauna is associated with water, and troglofauna with caves and spaces above the water table . Stygofauna can live within freshwater aquifers and within the pore spaces of limestone , calcrete or laterite , whilst larger animals can be found in cave waters and wells. Stygofaunal animals, like troglofauna, are divided into three groups based on their life history - stygophiles, stygoxenes, and stygobites.

[ 7 ] Troglofauna [ edit ] Main article: Troglofauna The microscopic cave snail Zospeum tholussum , found at depths of 743 to 1,392 m (2,438 to 4,567 ft) in the Lukina Jama–Trojama cave system of Croatia , is completely blind with a translucent shell Troglofauna are small cave -dwelling animals that have adapted to their dark surroundings. Troglofauna and stygofauna are the two types of subterranean fauna (based on life-history). Both are associated with subterranean environments – troglofauna is associated with caves and spaces above the water table and stygofauna with water. Troglofaunal species include spiders , insects , myriapods and others. Some troglofauna lives permanently underground and cannot survive outside the cave environment. Troglofauna adaptations and characteristics include a heightened sense of hearing, touch and smell.

[ 8 ] Loss of under-used senses is apparent in the lack of pigmentation as well as eyesight in most troglofauna. Troglofauna insects may exhibit a lack of wings and longer appendages .

Xenofauna [ edit ] Main article: Extraterrestrial life Xenofauna , theoretically , are alien organisms that can be described as animal analogues . While no alien life forms, animal-like or otherwise, are known definitively, the concept of alien life remains a subject of great interest in fields like astronomy , astrobiology , biochemistry , evolutionary biology , science fiction , and philosophy .

Other [ edit ] Examples of fauna in Olleros de Tera ( Spain ) Other terms include avifauna , which means " bird fauna" and piscifauna (or ichthyofauna ), which means " fish fauna".

Treatises [ edit ] Classic faunas [ edit ] Linnaeus, Carolus .

Fauna Suecica . 1746 See also [ edit ] Environment portal Ecology portal Earth sciences portal Biodiversity Biome Ecology Ecosystem Environmental movement Fauna and Flora Preservation Society Gene pool Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Natural environment Soil zoology References [ edit ] ^ Wikisource:1911 Encyclopædia Britannica/Linnaeus ^ NCRI ^ Infauna organisms in hydrothermal environments have developed adaptive strategies to survive harsh conditions, such as extreme temperatures, low pH levels, and reduced salinity. They constructed galleries, with the highest abundance in H1, and the dominant classes, Malacostraca and Polychaeta, demonstrating mobility-based strategies like burrowing or crawling. These strategies help infauna cope with hydrothermal influence.” (Rodriguez Uribe 2023). hydrothermal influence refers to the transformative effects of hot water on geological, chemical, and biological systems, and it plays a significant role in a wide range of natural processes and human activities.

Vermeij, Geerat (2009), Nature: An Economic History , Princeton University Press, ISBN 9781400826490 . p. 266 ^ Vermeij, Geerat (2009), Nature: An Economic History , Princeton University Press, ISBN 9781400826490 . p. 267 ^ Fauna of Sandy Beaches ^ Josef Rusek (1998). "Biodiversity of Collembola and their functional role in the ecosystem".

Biodiversity and Conservation .

7 (9): 1207– 1219.

Bibcode : 1998BiCon...7.1207R .

doi : 10.1023/A:1008887817883 .

S2CID 22883809 .

^ Rubens M. Lopes, Janet Warner Reid, Carlos Eduardo Falavigna Da Rocha (1999).

"Copepoda: developments in ecology, biology and systematics: proceedings of the Seventh international conference on Copepoda, held in Curitiba" .

Hydrobiologia . 453/454. Springer: 576.

ISBN 9780792370482 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Phil Chapman (1982).

"The Origins of Troglobites" (PDF) .

Proceedings of the University of Bristol Spelæological Society .

16 (2): 133– 141.

External links [ edit ] Look up fauna in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

"Biodiversity of Collembola and their functional role in the ecosystem" (by Josef Rusek; September 1998) v t e Elements of nature Universe Space Time Energy Matter chemical elements particles Change Earth Earth science History geological Structure Geology Plate tectonics Oceans Gaia hypothesis Future Weather Meteorology Atmosphere (Earth) Climate Clouds Moonlight Rain Snow Sunlight Tides Wind tornado tropical cyclone Natural environment Ecology Ecosystem Field Radiation Wilderness Wildfires Life Origin (abiogenesis) Evolutionary history Biosphere Hierarchy Biology astrobiology Biodiversity Organism Eukaryota fauna animals flora plants fungi protista Prokaryotes archaea bacteria Viruses See also Nature-based solutions Category v t e Fauna of Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Western Sahara v t e Fauna of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e Fauna of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard v t e Fauna of Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna v t e Fauna of  North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands v t e Fauna of South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Authority control databases National Czech Republic Spain Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐66xgc
Cached time: 20250814215257
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.921 seconds
Real time usage: 1.152 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 26520/1000000
Revision size: 11647/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 132564/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13466/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 26/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 91534/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.485/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24331684/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  984.094      1 -total
 25.70%  252.921      6 Template:Navbox
 21.72%  213.788    105 Template:Iso2country
 14.74%  145.023      1 Template:Asia_topic
 13.82%  135.977      1 Template:Reflist
 13.34%  131.297      1 Template:Lang
 10.74%  105.736      1 Template:Europe_topic
  9.81%   96.580      2 Template:Citation
  9.15%   90.006      1 Template:Nature_nav
  7.22%   71.020      1 Template:Refimprove Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:722672:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215257 and revision id 1300569601. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fauna&oldid=1300569601 " Categories : Animal ecology Ecology terminology Organisms Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Swedish-language text This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 03:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fauna 81 languages Add topic

