Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In practice Toggle In practice subsection 1.1 India 1.2 France 1.3 People's Republic of China 1.4 Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 1.5 Japan 2 National economic planning 3 See also 4 References 5 Literature Toggle the table of contents Indicative planning 5 languages العربية Deutsch Español Français Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of economic planning Part of a series on Economic systems Major types Capitalism Socialism By ideology Associative Capitalist Corporate Democratic Laissez-faire Mercantilist Neo- Neoliberal Social market State Welfare Democratic Developmentalism Distributist Fascist Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgist Green Nationalist Protectionist Religious Buddhist economics Christian Sabbath economics Islamic Socialist Communist Market socialist Mutualist Participatory Socialist market Socialist-oriented market State Syndicalist Social credit Traditionalist Corporatist Feudalism By coordination Closed (autarky) Decentralized Digital Dirigist Dual Gift Informal Market Mixed Natural Open Planned Robinson Crusoe Sharing Subsistence Underground Vertical archipelago Virtual By regional model Asian East Asian Chinese Singaporean Keralan European Anglo-Saxon German Nordic Dutch Rhenish Soviet Latin America Socialism of the 21st century Sectors Common ownership Private Public Voluntary Property types Collective ownership Commons ( Common ownership ) Private property State ownership Social ownership Transition Collectivization Communization Corporatization Demutualization Deregulation Expropriation Financialization Liberalization Marketization Municipalization Mutualization Nationalization Privatization Socialization Marxist Coordination Barter Market Free Open Regulated Planning In kind Cybernetics Indicative Material balancing Price Self-managed Peer-to-peer Sharing Open access Other types Attention Commons-based peer production Expeditionary Hunter-gatherer Inclusive Democracy Information Manorialism Newly industrialized Palace Plantation Plutonomy Post-capitalist Post-industrial Post-scarcity Resource-based Token Traditional Transition World Business portal Economics portal v t e Indicative planning is a form of economic planning implemented by a state in an effort to solve the problem of imperfect information in market economies by coordination of private and public investment through forecasts and output targets. The resulting plans aim to supply economically valuable information as a public good that the market by itself cannot disseminate, or where forward markets are nonexistent. However, indicative planning takes only endogenous market uncertainty into account, plans the economy accordingly, and does not look into exogenous uncertainty like technology, foreign trade, etc. Indicative plans serve to complement and enhance the market, as opposed to replace the market mechanism, hence they are adopted in market-based and mixed economies and were most widely practiced in France and Japan before the 1980s.

[ 1 ] When utilizing indicative planning, the state employs "influence, subsidies, grants, and taxes [to affect the economy], but does not compel".

[ 2 ] Indicative planning is contrasted with directive or mandatory planning , where a state (or other economic unit) sets quotas and mandatory output requirements. Planning by inducement is often referred to as indicative planning.

In practice [ edit ] Indicative planning is coordinated information that guides the choices of separate state and private entities in a market economy or mixed economy .

[ 3 ] India [ edit ] Eighth Five Year Plan (1992 - 1997) adopted Indicative Planning in India. Eighth Five Year Plan (1992 - 1997) was for managing the transition from a centrally planned economy to market led economy through indicative planning.

France [ edit ] Indicative planning originated in France after the Second World War by Charles de Gaulle in 1946 to strengthen the French economy and offset the demands of socialists and Communists calling for socialization of the means of production and/or Stalinist command planning . Indicative planning was one aspect of dirigisme that lasted until the 1980s. Indicative planning was carried out by the General Planning Commission . The underlying concept behind indicative planning is the early identification of oversupply, bottlenecks and shortages so that state investment behavior can be modified in a timely fashion to reduce the incidence of market disequilibrium, with the goal being a concerted economy.

[ 4 ] Policy tools used included export subsidies , R&D funding, tax breaks , preferential lending by state-owned banks , and a relaxed antitrust policy.

People's Republic of China [ edit ] Since the 1978 economic reforms in China, the state reduced its role to directing economic activity rather than managing it through directive plans. By the early 21st century, the Chinese government had limited the role of directive mandatory planning to goods of national importance and large-scale construction, while increasing the scope of indicative planning and market forces in all other sectors of the economy.

[ 5 ] The current Chinese socialist market economy is largely based on market forces for consumer goods and indicative planning for heavy industry in the public sector .

Union of Soviet Socialist Republics [ edit ] The Soviet Union utilized indicative plans for its state-run economy up until 1928, before they were integrated into mandatory planning under the Supreme Council of the National Economy and later by the Gosplan .

[ 6 ] Alexei Kosygin 's 1965 Soviet economic reform tried to introduce some sort of indicative planning in the USSR.

Japan [ edit ] The Japanese government practiced indicative planning through the Japanese Economic Planning Agency .

National economic planning [ edit ] The term National Economic Planning is associated with government's effort to coordinate the working of both the public sector and the private sector through a structured mechanism. Although, during the 20th century, the term was more associated with the communist and eastern economies, through the 1970s, theorists and practitioners documented the growth of this practice amongst western economies too [1] [2] [3] [4] . In the latter part of the 20th century and till date, economists have demanded that underdeveloped and developing countries — especially in continents like Africa — should embrace National Economic Planning to a large extent [5] [6] . Famous proponents and practitioners of National Economic Planning have been Nobel Prize–winning Russian politician Leonid Kantorovich , John M Hartwick [7] , Carl Landauer (who, in 1947, wrote one of the first western books on the subject, titled Theory of National Economic Planning), [ citation needed ] American Republican politician Alf Landon , the Russian born Canadian politician David Lewis , Chinese politician Zhang Baoshun and German sociologist Adolph Lowe .

See also [ edit ] Chinese economic reform Market economy Mixed economy Dirigisme Socialist economics State capitalism State-sponsored capitalism Economic planning New Economic Policy References [ edit ] ^ Nielsen K. (2008) Indicative Planning. In: Palgrave Macmillan (eds) The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics . Palgrave Macmillan, London. "Indicative planning aims to coordinate private and public investment and output plans through forecasts or targets. Compliance is voluntary. The underlying logic is that the plan can supply economically valuable information which, as a public good, the market mechanism cannot disseminate efficiently. It may be perceived as a substitute for non-existing forward markets. However, indicative planning takes into account only endogenous market uncertainty, not exogenous uncertainty (technology, foreign trade and so on). Indicative planning has been most consistently and continuously implemented in France and Japan but has been used in many other countries, although decreasingly so since the 1970s." ^ Alec Nove (1987), "Planned Economy," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics , v. 3, p. 879.

^ "Indicative Planning | Encyclopedia.com" .

^ "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on 2020-05-15 . Retrieved 2022-07-10 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "China | Culture, History, Maps, & People" . 23 February 2024.

^ "Indicative Planning | Encyclopedia.com" .

Literature [ edit ] Carl Landauer: Planwirtschaft und Verkehrswirtschaft Duncker & Humblodt, München und Leipzig 1931.

Carl Landauer: Theory of national economic planning , Berkeley, California: University of California Press, 1944 first edition; 1947 2. edition.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indicative_planning&oldid=1237114588 " Categories : Economic systems Economic planning French economic policy Mixed economies Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2009 This page was last edited on 28 July 2024, at 05:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Indicative planning 5 languages Add topic

