Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Index of burials 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Smolensky Lutheran Cemetery 7 languages Čeština Eesti Esperanto Français Latviešu Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 59°57′N 30°15′E ﻿ / ﻿ 59.95°N 30.25°E ﻿ / 59.95; 30.25 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Smolensk Lutheran Cemetery ) Cemetery in St. Petersburg, Russia This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Smolensky Lutheran Cemetery Smolensker Friedhof Details Established 1747 Country Russia Coordinates 59°57′N 30°15′E ﻿ / ﻿ 59.95°N 30.25°E ﻿ / 59.95; 30.25 The Smolenskoye(-oe) Cemetery (in German Smolensker Friedhof ) is a Lutheran cemetery on Dekabristov Island in Saint Petersburg , Russia . It is one of the largest and oldest non- orthodox cemeteries in the city. Until the early 20th century it was one of the main burial grounds for ethnic Germans .

History [ edit ] The Lutheran cemetery on Dekabristov Island is known to have existed in 1747. The Smolenka River divides it from the Smolensky Orthodox Cemetery on Vasilievsky Island . This cemetery contained the burials of the parishioners of the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Saint Katarina and the Catholic Church of St. Catherine , including Leonhard Euler , Xavier de Maistre , Germain Henri Hess , José de Ribas , Moritz von Jacobi , Agustín de Betancourt , Jean-François Thomas de Thomon , Ludvig Nobel , Fyodor Litke , Georg Friedrich Parrot , Karl Nesselrode , Vladimir Lamsdorf , Vasily Radlov , Wilhelm Sauerbrey Some tombstones of notable people were transferred to the necropolis of famous people at Alexander Nevsky Lavra . Among them are Thomas de Thomon (relocated in the 1930s), Euler (1956), Betancourt (1979), and others.

In the last perestroika years of the Soviet Union two parts of the cemetery were destroyed. The first was a large section in the far north west corner of the cemetery which was entirely flattened to make way for a building for a local fire department in 1985. The second was a small section at the entrance which was replaced with a petrol station in the early 1990s.

The grave of Karl Nesselrode The grave of Adolph Theodor Kupffer The grave of Fyodor  Nikolajewitsch Litke The grave of José de Ribas The grave of Louisa Catherine Adams Index of burials [ edit ] The person who has done the most work in investigating the current status of the cemetery is Robert Leinonen, a longtime resident of Saint Petersburg who moved to Germany in 1991.

Between 1988 and 1991, Leinonen went on countless personal visits to the cemetery itself and compiled an inventory of all those graves that are still standing today, copying the exact writing on each headstone . He has published a two-volume book on the cemetery detailing its history ( Deutsche in St. Petersburg: ein Blick auf den Deutschen Evangelisch-Lutherischen Smolenski-Friedhof und in die europäische Kulturgeschichte , 1998). The second volume contains an index of all those buried there whose graves are still standing today.

The publications are used by genealogists for family research in pre-revolutionary Russia and the early Soviet period when vital records are missing or prove difficult to find.

Historians use them to research the social histories of the city.

Somewhere in the cemetery lies the little body of infant Louisa Catherine Adams (August 12, 1811 - September 15, 1812), the fourth and last child and only daughter of John Quincy and Louisa Adams .

References [ edit ] Robert Leinonen & Erika Voigt: Deutsche in St. Petersburg: ein Blick auf den deutschen evangelisch-lutherischen Smolenski-Friedhof und in die europäische Kulturgeschichte . Lüneburg: Institut Nordostdeutsches Kulturwerk, 1998.

ISBN 3-932267-04-4 (volume 1) and ISBN 3-932267-14-1 (volume 2) External links [ edit ] Photos of cemetery A further site dealing with the history of the cemetery and others in the nearby area. The information relating to this cemetery is towards the bottom of the entry.

Могила академика В.В. Радлова на Смоленском Лютеранском кладбище Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Smolensky_Lutheran_Cemetery&oldid=1306032500 " Categories : Burials at Smolensky Lutheran Cemetery History of Saint Petersburg Cemeteries in Saint Petersburg German cemeteries Lutheran cemeteries in Russia German diaspora in Russia Cultural heritage monuments of regional significance in Saint Petersburg Cemeteries established in the 1740s 1747 establishments in the Russian Empire Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2018 All articles lacking in-text citations Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 14:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Smolensky Lutheran Cemetery 7 languages Add topic

