Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and career 2 Life and work Toggle Life and work subsection 2.1 Yaksha-Yakshi at Reserve Bank of India 3 Controversy 4 Legacy 5 In media 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Ramkinkar Baij 9 languages অসমীয়া বাংলা Español हिन्दी മലയാളം मराठी مصرى தமிழ் Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian sculptor and painter (1906–1980) For the film, see Ramkinkar Baij (film) . For the book, see Ramkinkar Baij (book) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Ramkinkar Baij" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ramkinkar Baij রামকিঙ্কর বেইজ Born ( 1906-05-25 ) 25 May 1906 Jugipara, Bankura Town , Bankura District , Bengal , British India (present-day West Bengal , India) [ 1 ] Died 2 August 1980 (1980-08-02) (aged 74) IPGMER and SSKM Hospital , Calcutta , West Bengal , India Nationality Indian Known for Sculptor , painter Notable work Lady with Dog, Sujata, Santhal Family , Mill Call, Yaksha-Yakshi (Jokkho-Jokkhi) Movement Contextual Modernism Awards Padma Bhushan (1970) Patron(s) Ramananda Chatterjee Ramkinkar Baij ( Bengali : রামকিঙ্কর বেইজ) (25 May 1906 – 2 August 1980) was an Indian sculptor and painter, one of the pioneers of modern Indian sculpture and a key figure of Contextual Modernism .

[ 2 ] Early life and career [ edit ] Baij was born in an economically modest family in the Bankura district of the modern state of West Bengal in India. In that sense, he was a Bengali, not an Adivasi , as many people usually think. The surname Baij derived from Boidda (Baidya) and Boijo consequently. His family surname was Poramanik and was abandoned by him in early 1925. His known relatives include his nephew Dibakar Baij and great-nephew Shibaprasad Baij. Ramkinkar Baij was cremated by Dibakar at Santiniketan, and had named him one of his legal heirs. However, many of his artistic creations have been inspired by the lifestyles of rural dalit or Adivasi ( Santhal ) communities living in and around his place of work Santiniketan .

While in his mid-teens Ramkinkar used to paint portraits of Indian freedom fighters involved in the Non-Cooperation Movement against the British rulers of India. At the age of 16 he was noticed by the renowned journalist Ramananda Chatterjee . Four years later Ramkinkar joined the Visva-Bharati University at Santiniketan as a student of fine arts .

[ 3 ] After obtaining a diploma from the university he went on to head the sculpture department. Ramkinkar's renowned sculptor disciples include Prabhas Sen, Shankho Chowdhury, Avtar Singh Panwar, Madan Bhatnagar, Dharmani, Balbir Singh Katt, Rajul Dharial, Susan Ghose, [ 4 ] and Kiron Sinha .

[ 5 ] Life and work [ edit ] A statue of Buddha by Ram Kinker Baij at Shantiniketan campus.

Professor R. Siva Kumar , an authority of the Santiniketan School of Art [ 6 ] [ 7 ] wrote, "Ramkinkar Baij was born on 25 May 1906 in Bankura in West Bengal, into a family of little economic and social standing, and grew, by the sheer dint of talent and determination, into one of the most distinguished early modernists in Indian art. As a young boy, he grew up watching local craftsmen and image-makers at work; and making small clay figures and paintings with whatever came his way. His talent, prodigious for his age, attracted the attention of local people, especially of the nationalists with whom he was associated. This led him in 1925, on the advice of Ramananda Chatterjee the nationalist publisher and apologist for the new Indian art movement, to mark his way to Kala Bhavana , the art school at Santiniketan . At Santiniketan , under the guidance of Nandalal Bose and encouraged by its liberating intellectual environment, shaped by Rabindranath Tagore , his artistic skills and intellectual horizons acquired new depth and complexity. Soon after completing his studies at Kala Bhavana he became a member of its faculty, and along with Nandalal and Benode Behari Mukherjee played a decisive role in making Santiniketan the most important centre for modern art in pre-Independence India.

The Santal Family made in 1938, Santiniketan.

Santiniketan was conceived as a locus for artistic experimentation and resurgence rather than as a mere centre for imparting training and knowledge. This allowed talented individuals to add social dimension and give public expression to their personal vision. Ramkinkar used this opportunity to make monumental public sculpture, undertaken entirely at his own initiative. Beginning in early thirties he began to fill the campus with sculptures, one after the other, which were innovative in subject matter and personal in style. His first magnum opus in this genre was the Santal Family done in 1938. In this larger than life sculpture he represented the tribal peasants of the region, giving the figures iconic presence and dignified grace that was so far limited to the images of Gods and Rulers. In a country where all public art-work was undertaken only at the behest of Government commissioning and executed in consonance with the taste of conservative ruling elites, this was a radical departure. The use of cement and laterite mortar to model the figures, and the use of a personal style in which modern western and Indian pre-classical sculptural values were brought together was equally radical. With this seminal work Ramkinkar established himself as undoubted modern Indian sculptor.

[ 8 ] Ramkinkar was singularly reticent and otherworldly as he was single-minded in his commitment to art and humanity. But this did not stop his work from being noticed and appreciated by sensitive artists and connoisseurs, even if it were to remain a small group. Although his work was passed over for quite a while, gradually it began to get both national and international attention. He was invited to participate in the Salon des Salon des Réalités Nouvelles in 1950 and in the Salon de Mai 1951. And in the seventies national honours began to come his way one after the other. In 1970 the Government of India honoured him with the Padma Bhushan , [ 9 ] in 1976 he was made a fellow of the Lalit Kala Akademi , in 1976 he was conferred the Desikottama by Visva Bharati ,  and in 1979 an honorary D.Litt. by the Rabindra Bharati University .

Yaksha-Yakshi at Reserve Bank of India [ edit ] Figure of Yakshi by Ramkinkar Baij at Reserve Bank of India depicting the idea of 'prosperity through agriculture'.

In the early independent India, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru , the Prime Minister, suggested that public buildings, many of which were large imposing structures, could be utilized to ‘encourage Indian artists to function in 'some way’ and sculptors, painters, designers, etc. could be asked to cooperate. He made a committee to perform the selection of artists.

[ 10 ] Amongst other schemes, the Committee recommended that sculptures could be erected on either side of the main entrance of the RBI office at New Delhi, one depicting the idea of "prosperity through industry" and the other "prosperity through agriculture". At the instance of J.R.D.Tata , the then Director of the Central Board, the views of Carl Khandalawalla were sought. Carl suggested that the Bank could consider having figures of " Yaksha " and " Yakshini " on the two sides. On his advice, the invitation to tender for the adornment of the frontage of the New Delhi Office was extended to the nine artists.

[ 10 ] Out of the nine artists invited, five submitted their proposals and amongst them only one submitted models and sketches. The proposal of Shri Ram Kinkar Baij was accepted. The art form of the male ‘Yaksha’ was drawn from the statue of the ‘Parkham Yaksha’ in the Mathura Museum and Yakshini was derived from “Bisnagar Yakshini” from the Calcutta Museum .

[ 10 ] ‘That must have been 1954. I don’t remember it correctly. I received a letter to send a model for a sculpture to be placed at the Reserve Bank. Off I sent a three-foot maquette.’‘The first task was to search for the stone. I went out searching. We found it in Kangra valley’s Baijnath, on the way to Kullu. Sandstone – Shivalik sandstone. Quite to my liking.’ -Baij [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Somendranath Bandyopadhyay's book 'My days with Ramkinkar Baij' (translated into English by Bhaswati Ghosh) mentions the above and the following quotes: ‘You might have noticed that I’ve placed a discus in my sculpture’s hand. That was my idea. Addition. It’s a modern-day machine and is symbolic of industry. I got the idea for the flower and paddy cluster in Yakshi’s hand from the old statues. You know what Yaksha held in the ancient statues? A mallet. And a bag in the left hand. I have placed that too. Money bag. My Yaksha is completely modern – with a machine and a money bag. And is it possible to have the money bag and not have a fat belly? Yakshas do have protruding bellies, my dear. You must have seen ancient Yaksha statues. My Yaksha has it too.’ -Baij [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Controversy [ edit ] A bronze bust of Rabindranath Tagore made by Baij was placed in 1984 at an outdoor monument in Balatonfüred , Hungary, on a promenade named for Tagore alongside Lake Balaton. Tagore had received cardiac treatment at the [ 13 ] (Szívkórház) at Balatonfüred in 1926.

The National Gallery of Modern Art (NGMA) in New Delhi has the original concrete casting of the bust, from which the bronze bust was prepared, and dates the original to 1940, one year before Tagore's death.

[ 14 ] Apparently Tagore did not die "right after" the bust was completed.

When West Bengal Culture Minister Jatin Chakraborty unveiled Ramkinkar's bust of Tagore in Hungary, he had remarked that it did not "look" like Tagore, and should probably be replaced. When people like Satyajit Ray swiftly responded, the matter was laid to rest".

[ 15 ] A differing view holds that many prominent persons including Maitreyi Devi (poet and novelist) supported Chakraborty, and that later the effort to replace the bust was cancelled by then cultural minister Buddhadeb Bhattacharjee .

The once controversial bust has been replicated by the Indian government and given by it to a number of foreign countries including Colombia, [ 16 ] Finland [ 17 ] and Israel.

[ 18 ] Some time between 2003 and 2009, the outdoor sculpture at Balatonfüred was replaced with a different appearing bust of Tagore, and the original bust by Baij was moved to room 220 [ 19 ] of the State Hospital for Cardiology in Balatonfüred, which is the same room where Rabindranath Tagore had stayed in 1926.

Legacy [ edit ] Ritwik Ghatak wisely made a documentary on Baij named ' Ramkinkar ' (1975) where he featured him as a political icon.

[ 20 ] The secret behind this fearless observation of this "Padma Bhushan" winning artist is disclosed by himself in the documentary by Ghatak. A Calcutta publisher, Monfakira has an English book on ramkinkar, 'self-portrait', translated from Bengali by Sudipto Chakraborty of Ranchi.

[ 21 ] In 2012 the Sculptor K.S. Radhakrishnan curated a grand retrospective Of Ramkinkar's at the National Gallery of Modern Art , Delhi. A scholarly book on the artist, Ramkinkar Baij (book) , by the eminent Art Historian professor R. Siva Kumar was launched at this event. The book is believed to be the most comprehensive one on Ramkinkar Baij. In 2013 R. Siva Kumar was awarded by the Paschimbanga Bangla Akademi for this book. 24 January 2013 the first Ramkinkar Baij Memorial Lecture was delivered by one of Ramkinkar favorite students, the eminent artist K. G. Subramanyan .

In media [ edit ] Ramkinkar Baij (1975) is an incomplete personality study or documentary by Ritwik Ghatak . The film remained unfinished due to the death of Ritwik Ghatak.

[ 22 ] Samaresh Basu 's unfinished novel Dekhi Nai Phire (I did not look back), cut short by the author's death, is also a classic piece based on Ramkinkar's life.

Asur (2020), a Bengali movie starring Jeet , Abir Chatterjee and Nusrat Jahan directed by Pavel , is a small tribute to him.

References [ edit ] ^ "Ramkinkar Baij" .

^ "Five landmark works by India's foremost sculptor Ramkinkar Baij" .

The Indian Express . 30 May 2020 . Retrieved 15 December 2023 .

^ Neglected treasures The Hindu, 31 August 2008.

^ Janak Jhankar Narzary, sculptor and professor emeritus, Kala Bhavana, Visva Bharati.

^ Ghosh, Sabyasachi (7 June 1987).

"The Agony and the Ecstasy" .

The Telegraph . Kolkata, India. pp.

18– 19 . Retrieved 1 April 2025 .

^ "Slide Presentation by Prof R Siva Kumar at NGMA, Mumbai - Buzzintown" . Archived from the original on 1 May 2013 . Retrieved 30 January 2013 .

^ "Prof.R.Shiva Kumar's presentation on Ramkinkar Baij | Cart An Art" .

www.cartanart.com . Archived from the original on 16 May 2013.

^ "A fiery energy" .

www.telegraphindia.com . Retrieved 15 December 2023 .

^ "Padma Awards" (PDF) . Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India. 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 October 2015 . Retrieved 21 July 2015 .

^ a b c "Anecdote 3: Of Art, Central Banks, and Philistines" .

Reserve Bank of India .

^ a b "Cutting Through Mountains to Build a Statue" .

The Wire . Retrieved 25 April 2021 .

^ a b Bandyopādhyāẏa, Somendranātha (2012).

My Days with Ramkinkar Baij . Niyogi Books.

ISBN 978-81-920912-4-2 .

^ State Hospital for Cardiology ^ "Portrait of Rabindranath Tagore - Ramkinkar Baij" .

Google Arts & Culture . Retrieved 22 February 2024 .

^ "India's National Fortnightly Magazine" .

Frontline . Retrieved 22 February 2024 .

^ "Diplomacy & Foreign Affairs » Cultural Diplomacy" . Archived from the original on 19 December 2014 . Retrieved 19 December 2014 .

‘Cultural diplomacy' ^ "Spectacular Rabindranath Tagore programme at Uppsala University | SASNET - Swedish South Asian Studies Network" . Archived from the original on 19 December 2014 . Retrieved 19 December 2014 .

‘Spectacular Rabindranath Tagore programme at Uppsala University' ^ "Tagore's Bust to be Unveiled at Hebrew University" .

www.newsbharati.com .

^ "Rabindranath Tagore in Balatonfüred, Hungary – Kaberi's blog" . Retrieved 22 March 2022 .

^ "A way of seeing: Sculptor Ramkinkar Baij's misunderstood art works" .

The Indian Express . 27 August 2017 . Retrieved 15 December 2023 .

^ "Monfakira" .

www.monfakira.com . Archived from the original on 28 December 2013 . Retrieved 1 January 2014 .

^ BFI.org External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ramkinkar Baij .

Ramkinkar Baij: THE MAN THAT WAS v t e Padma Bhushan award recipients (1970–1979) 1970 Ramkinkar Baij Hirabai Barodekar Buddhadeb Bosu Amiya Chakravarty T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar Lala Hansraj Gupta Ratan Lal Joshi Gurram Jashuva Narayan Sadoba Kajrolkar Kumari Kamala P. K. Kelkar M. S. Krishnan Syed Abdul Latif Bhagwantrao Mandloi Mahesh Prasad Mehray Sombhu Mitra Vivekananda Mukhopadhyaya Krishnaswami Ramiah Anant alias Annasaheb Sahasrabuddhe Surrendar Saini Viswanatha Satyanarayana Ahmed Jan Thirakwa N. M. Wagle Prem Nath Wahi Yashpal 1971 N. Ramaswami Ayyar Suraj Bhan Gokulbhai Bhatt Jaishankar Bhojak Kandathil Mammen Cherian Ramrao Deshmukh Satish Dhawan Abasaheb Garware Gangubai Hangal Musiri Subramania Iyer Palghat Mani Iyer Mungtu Ram Jaipuria Veni Shankar Jha Jainendra Kumar Raj Kapoor Dhananjay Keer Amir Khan Nisar Hussain Khan Guru Kunchu Kurup R. K. Laxman Shantilal Jamnadas Mehta Ved Rattan Mohan Bishnupada Mukhopadhyaya Kalindi Charan Panigrahi Manibhai J. Patel D. K. Pattammal Krishnarao Phulambrikar Venkatarama Ramalingam Pillai Vulimiri Ramalingaswami Suresh Chandra Roy Pandurang Vasudeo Sukhatme Pichu Sambamoorthi Bhagwati Charan Verma Parmeshwari Lal Verma 1972 Jagjit Singh Aurora Madhavrao Bagal Gopal Gurunath Bewoor Gulestan Rustom Billimoria Kunhiraman Palat Candeth Ram Narayan Chakravarti Yashodhara Dasappa Hari Chand Dewan Minoo Merwan Engineer Inderjit Singh Gill Lakhumal Hiranand Hiranandani L. A. Krishna Iyer Sourendra Nath Kohli Jai Krishna Nilakanta Krishnan Ashwini Kumar Pran Nath Luthra N. G. Krishna Murti T. A. Pai Vinayakrao Patwardhan Dattatraya Yeshwant Phadke Bhalchandra Nilkanth Purandare Tapishwar Narain Raina Bharat Ram Mohinder Singh Randhawa Adya Rangacharya M. B. Ramachandra Rao A. S. Rao Sujoy Bhushan Roy Khusro Faramurz Rustamji Shantilal C. Sheth Baldev Singh Khem Karan Singh Sartaj Singh Sagat Singh Birendranath Sircar Papanasam Sivan Chandrika Prasad Srivastava M. S. Swaminathan K. Swaminathan Bal Dattatreya Tilak Syed Husain Zaheer 1973 Om P. Bahl Chembai Harindranath Chattopadhyay Banarsidas Chaturvedi M. A. Muthiah Chettiar M. F. Husain Pothan Joseph N. R. Malkani Vinoo Mankad R. M. Muzumdar Krishnarao Shankar Pandit Pitambar Pant Vennelakanti Raghavayya Raja Ramanna K. Sukumaran 1974 Alice Boner Camille Bulcke Ram Kumar Caroli Dhirendra Nath Ganguly D. V. Gundappa V. S. Huzurbazar Chintamoni Kar Mogubai Kurdikar Jayant Pandurang Naik Habib Rahman B. N. Reddy John Richardson Toppur Seethapathy Sadasivan Sukhlal Sanghvi Hasmukh Dhirajlal Sankalia Jaideva Singh Khushwant Singh Arunachala Sreenivasan Raman Viswanathan 1975 Begum Akhtar Dilbagh Singh Athwal Asima Chatterjee Madhav Sadashiv Gore Pratul Chandra Gupta P. K. Iyengar Darab Jehangir Jussawala Pancheti Koteswaram Vasudev Vishnu Mirashi Balai Chand Mukhopadhyay Kirpal Singh Narang Ronald Carlton Vivian Piadade Noronha Ratan Shastri 1976 Malcolm Adiseshiah Harivansh Rai Bachchan Nabakanta Barua Laxmanshastri Balaji Joshi Naoroji Pirojsha Godrej Zehra Ali Yavar Jung Mallikarjun Mansur Yash Pal Bhogilal Pandya Udupi Ramachandra Rao Krishnaswami Srinivas Sanjivi Devulapalli Krishnasastri C. Sivaramamurti E. C. George Sudarshan 1977 Gopinath Aman Prithvi Singh Azad Harish-Chandra Kumar Gandharva Phulrenu Guha Jagmohan Kailas Nath Kaul Yusuf Husain K. S. Narayanaswamy Balasubramaniam Ramamurthi Perugu Siva Reddy Annapurna Devi Yudhvir Singh M. N. Srinivas Thenpattinam Ponnusamy Meenakshi Sundaran # Posthumous conferral 1954–1959 1960–1969 1970–1979 1980–1989 1990–1999 2000–2009 2010–2019 2020–2029 v t e Fellows of the Lalit Kala Akademi Painters Jamini Roy Nandalal Bose K. Venkatappa Benode Behari Mukherjee N. S. Bendre K. K. Hebbar K. C. S. Paniker M. F. Husain B. C. Sanyal Pakhal Tirumal Reddy K. S. Kulkarni K. H. Ara S. H. Raza K. G. Subramanyan Shiavax Chavda Paritosh Sen Mukul Dey Svetoslav Roerich Ram Gopal Vijayvargiya Ranbir Singh Bisht A. Ramachandran Bikash Bhattacharjee Akbar Padamsee Biren De Jeram Patel Ram Kumar Arpita Singh Jyoti Bhatt Sculptors D. P. Roy Choudhury Vinayak Pandurang Karmarkar Ramkinkar Baij Dhanraj Bhagat Sankho Chaudhuri Amarnath Sehgal Others C. Sivaramamurti Ravishankar Raval Mulk Raj Anand Karl Jamshed Khandalavala V. R. Amberkar M. S. Randhawa A. S. Raman Kapila Vatsyayan Keshav Malik Templates WikiProject Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Netherlands Artists ULAN 2 RKD Artists Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ramkinkar_Baij&oldid=1303800906 " Categories : 1906 births 1980 deaths Indian male sculptors People associated with Santiniketan People from Bankura district Visva-Bharati University alumni Academic staff of Visva-Bharati University Fellows of the Lalit Kala Akademi Indian art educators 20th-century Indian sculptors Recipients of the Padma Bhushan in arts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2015 Use Indian English from June 2015 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles needing additional references from July 2020 All articles needing additional references Pages using infobox artist with unknown parameters Articles with hCards Articles containing Bengali-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 03:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ramkinkar Baij 9 languages Add topic

