Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Argument 3 Influence 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents The Gift (essay) 12 languages Español Français Italiano Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Português Русский Suomi Svenska தமிழ் 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1925 essay by Marcel Mauss For other uses, see The Gift (disambiguation) § Nonfiction and anthologies .

Part of a series on Economic , applied , and development anthropology Basic concepts Barter Commodification Cultural capital Debt Embeddedness Finance Gift economy Inalienable possessions Limited good Reciprocity Redistribution Value Wealth Singularization (commodity pathway) Social capital Spheres of exchange Provisioning systems Hunting-gathering Moral economy Nomadic pastoralism Pastoralism Peasant economics Shifting cultivation Case studies Prestations Kula ring Moka exchange Potlatch Gifting Gifting remittances Organ gifting Shell money Provisioning Aché people (hunter-gatherers) Batek people Colonialism and development The Anti-Politics Machine Europe and the People Without History Political economy Jim Crow economy Related articles Anthropology of development Critique of political economy Culture of poverty Formalist–substantivist debate The Great Transformation Heritage commodification Nutritional anthropology Original affluent society Peasant economics Political economy State formation Major theorists Paul Bohannan Alexander Chayanov Stanley Diamond Raymond Firth Maurice Godelier David Graeber Jane I. Guyer Keith Hart Marvin Harris Bronisław Malinowski Marcel Mauss Sidney Mintz Karl Polanyi Marshall Sahlins Heinrich Schurtz Harold K. Schneider Eric Wolf Social and cultural anthropology v t e The Gift: Forms and Functions of Exchange in Archaic Societies ( French : Essai sur le don: forme et raison de l'échange dans les sociétés archaïques ) is a 1925 essay by the French sociologist Marcel Mauss that is the foundation of social theories of reciprocity and gift exchange .

History [ edit ] Mauss's original piece was entitled Essai sur le don. Forme et raison de l'échange dans les sociétés archaïques ("An essay on the gift: the form and reason of exchange in archaic societies") and was originally published in L'Année Sociologique in 1925.

[ 1 ] The essay was later republished in French in 1950 and translated into English in 1954 by Ian Cunnison, in 1990 by W. D. Halls, and in 2016 by Jane I. Guyer .

[ 2 ] Argument [ edit ] Mauss's essay focuses on the way that the exchange of objects between groups builds relationships between humans.

It analyzes the economic practices of archaic societies and finds that they have a common as well as a main practice centered on reciprocal exchange. In different archaic and indigenous societies, he finds evidence contrary to the presumptions of modern Western societies about the history and nature of exchange which assert that it is a relatively newer concept and practice. He shows that early exchange systems center around the obligations to give, to receive, and, most importantly, to reciprocate . They occur between groups, not only individuals, and they are a crucial part of “total phenomena” that work to build not just wealth and alliances marked by economic wants but social solidarity because “the gift” pervades all aspects of the society. Mauss calls it, therefore, a "total social fact ". He uses a comparative method , drawing upon published secondary scholarship on peoples from around the world, but especially the Pacific Northwest (especially potlatch ).

After examining the reciprocal gift-giving practices of each society, he finds in them common features, despite some variation.  From the disparate evidence, he builds a case for a foundation to human society based on collective (vs. individual) exchange practices. In doing so, he refutes the English tradition of liberal thought , such as utilitarianism , as distortions of human exchange practices. He concludes by speculating that social welfare programs may be recovering some aspects of the morality of the gift within modern market economies .

Influence [ edit ] The Gift has been very influential in anthropology , [ 3 ] where there is a large field of study devoted to reciprocity and exchange.

[ 4 ] It has also influenced philosophers, artists, and political activists, including Georges Bataille , Jacques Derrida , Jean Baudrillard , and more recently the work of David Graeber and the theologians John Milbank and Jean-Luc Marion .

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Jean Baudrillard De Beneficiis Gift economy James George Frazer References [ edit ] ^ Fournier, Marcel (28 July 2015).

Marcel Mauss: A Biography . Translated by Todd, Jane Marie. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press . p. 240.

ISBN 978-0-691-16807-4 .

^ Mauss, Marcel (2016).

The Gift . Jane I. Guyer (Expanded ed.). Chicago.

ISBN 978-0-9905050-0-6 .

OCLC 951155743 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Guyer, Jane I. (2016). "Translator's Introduction".

The Gift (Expanded ed.). Chicago. pp.

1– 25.

ISBN 978-0-9905050-0-6 .

OCLC 951155743 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Weiner, Annette B. (1992).

Inalienable possessions : the paradox of keeping-while-giving . Berkeley: University of California Press. pp.

24– 33.

ISBN 978-0-520-91180-2 .

OCLC 44958210 .

^ The anthropology of Christianity . Fenella Cannell. Durham: Duke University Press. 2006.

ISBN 0-8223-3608-1 .

OCLC 65425831 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) Further reading [ edit ] Georges Bataille , The Accursed Share (New York: Zone Books, 1988 [orig. pub. 1949]).

Claude Lévi-Strauss , Introduction to the Work of Marcel Mauss (London: Routledge, 1987 [orig. pub. 1950]).

Jacques Derrida , Given Time 1: Counterfeit Money (Chicago & London: University of Chicago Press, 1992 [orig.  pub. 1991]).

Jean Baudrillard , Symbolic Exchange and Death (Sage Publications (CA), Oct 1, 1993 [orig. pub. 1976]).

Lewis Hyde , The Gift: Imagination and the Erotic Life of Property (New York: Vintage, 2007 [orig. pub. 1983]).

Bronisław Malinowski , Argonauts of the Western Pacific (Available online, [orig. pub. 1922]).

Marilyn Strathern , The Gender of the Gift: Problems with Women and Problems with Society in Melanesia (Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1988).

External links [ edit ] 1954 translation 1990 translation 2016 translation, expanded edition Original text (in French) v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country Authority control databases : National France BnF data Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Gift_(essay)&oldid=1301235860 " Categories : 1925 essays French essays Anthropological essays Sociology books Giving Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: others Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 20:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Gift (essay) 12 languages Add topic

