Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Text 2 General outline 3 See also 4 Footnotes 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents The German Ideology 27 languages العربية Català Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Italiano עברית Кыргызча Latina Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Русский کوردی Српски / srpski Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Manuscripts written by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels in 1846 This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "The German Ideology" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 1988 Prometheus Book edition The German Ideology (German: Die deutsche Ideologie ), also known as A Critique of the German Ideology , [ 1 ] is a set of manuscripts written by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels around April or early May 1846. Marx and Engels did not find a publisher, but the work was retrieved and first published in 1932 by the Soviet Union 's Marx–Engels–Lenin Institute . The book uses satirical polemics to critique modern German philosophy , particularly that of young Hegelians such as Marx's former mentor Bruno Bauer , Ludwig Feuerbach , and Max Stirner 's The Ego and Its Own . It criticizes "ideology" as a form of "historical idealism", as opposed to Marx's historical materialism (the "materialist conception of history"). The first part of Volume I also examines the division of labor and Marx's theory of human nature , on which he states that humans "distinguish themselves from animals as soon as they begin to produce their means of subsistence".

Text [ edit ] The first page of the manuscript The text itself was written by Marx and Engels in Brussels in 1845 and 1846 but it was not published until 1932. The Preface and some of the alterations and additions are in Marx's hand. The bulk of the manuscript is in Engels' hand, except for Chapter V of Volume II and some passages of Chapter III of Volume I which are in Joseph Weydemeyer 's hand. Chapter V in Volume II was written by Moses Hess and edited by Marx and Engels. The text in German runs to around 700 pages.

[ 2 ] Recent research for the new Marx Engels Gesamtausgabe (MEGA) indicates that much of the "system" of the "materialist conception of history" in the first part of the book was created afterwards by the Marx-Engels Institute ( Russian : Институт К. Маркса и Ф. Энгельса ).

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Through the publication of the first volume of the Marx Engels Gesamtausgabe it was possible to show that "Marx and Engels did not write the manuscripts on the 'German ideology' as part of a book project, but rather as part of a magazine project in which other authors (Moses Hess, Georg Weerth , Wilhelm Weitling , etc.) were also involved. For this reason, a manuscript written by Roland Daniels , which was edited by Marx and Engels for the planned quarterly publication, is being printed in this volume for the first time. In terms of content, it was not initially the systematic elaboration of one's own theoretical positions that was the concern, but instead the polemical debate with young Hegelian and socialist contemporaries. However, the focus of the criticism of Marx and Engels was not on Feuerbach (as was mostly assumed up to now), but on Max Stirner, the author of the radical individualist work The Unique One and His Property [1844]. It could be proven that the majority of what the recipients of the last century saw as chapter 'I. Feuerbach' was originally written in controversy with Stirner. This also applies to the genesis of such central concepts as 'ideology' and 'petty bourgeois'. In addition, there are numerous digressions in which Marx and Engels present their own positions (depictions of the historical development of the German bourgeoisie, the relationship between intellectual and material rule and the history of private property). It was only during the course of this discussion that Marx and Engels made the decision to present their views in a separate chapter and combine them with a critique of Feuerbach. To this end, they removed central parts of the text of the Stirner and Bauer criticism from the context of their composition. These text developments are documented in detail in the apparatus volume. The text-critical apparatus with its discursive presentation of variants makes the drafting process transparent and, in particular, the intensive collaboration between Marx and Engels on the manuscripts comprehensible." [ 5 ] General outline [ edit ] Marx and Engels argue that humans distinguish themselves from animals as soon as they begin to produce their means of subsistence to support their needs; what individuals are, coincides with their production in both how and what they produce. The nature of individuals depends on the material conditions determining their production.

[ 6 ] How far the productive forces of a nation are developed is shown by the degree to which the division of labor has been carried. Also, there is a direct link between division of labor and forms of ownership.

The ruling class, in ruling the material force of society, is simultaneously the ruling intellectual force of society. They regulate the production and distribution of ideas of their age.  As the ruling class changes with time, so too do the ideals and the new ruling class must instill upon its society its own ideas which will become universal. The ruling ideas are thought to be the universal interest. However, it is an illusion that the ideas of the ruling class are the communal interests.

[ 7 ] This system will forever remain in place so long as society is organized around the need for a ruling class.

[ 8 ] To illustrate this theoretical framework, Marx draws on his formulation of base and superstructure . Historical development is the reflection of changes in the economic and material relations of the base. When the base changes, a revolutionary class becomes the new ruling class that forms the superstructure. During revolution, the revolutionary class makes certain that its ideas appeal to humanity in general so that after a successful revolution these ideas appear natural and universal. These ideas, which the super-structural elements of society propagate, then become the governing ideology of the historical period. Furthermore, the governing ideology mystifies the economic relations of society and therefore places the proletariat in a state of false consciousness that serves to reproduce the working class.

[ 9 ] "Morality, religion, metaphysics, all the rest of ideology and their corresponding forms of consciousness no longer retain the semblance of independence; they have no history and no development; but men, developing their material production and their material intercourse, alter, along with their real existence, their thinking and the products of their collective thinking." In The German Ideology (as in his later texts, volume 1 and volume 3 of Capital ), Marx discusses how primitive accumulation ‘alienates humans from nature’.

[ 10 ] : 14 See also [ edit ] German idealism The Indian Ideology and The Californian Ideology , whose titles were inspired by The German Ideology Lumpenproletariat Marxist philosophy Sociology of knowledge Young Hegelians Young Marx Footnotes [ edit ] ^ "Marx & Engels Selected Works" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 2021-05-31 .

^ Hamilton, Christopher (2003).

Understanding Philosophy for AS Level . Nelson Thornes.

^ "Marx-Engels-Gesamtausgabe (MEGA)" .

mega.bbaw.de . Retrieved 2021-11-14 .

^ Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels Gesamtausgabe (MEGA). Herausgegeben von der Internationalen Marx-Engels-Stiftung Amsterdam. Erste Abteilung: Werke. Artikel. Entwürfe. Band 5: Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels: Deutsche Ideologie. Manuskripte und Drucke. Bearbeitet von Ulrich Pagel, Gerald Hubmann und Christine Weckwerth. Berlin, Boston 2017.

^ "I/5 M/E - Marx-Engels-Gesamtausgabe (MEGA)" .

mega.bbaw.de . Retrieved 2023-08-13 .

So konnte gezeigt werden, dass Marx und Engels die Manuskripte zur „deutschen Ideologie" gar nicht im Rahmen eines Buch-, sondern vielmehr eines Zeitschriftenprojektes verfassten, an dem auch andere Autoren (Moses Heß, Georg Weerth, Wilhelm Weitling u.a.) beteiligt waren. Aus diesem Grund kommt im vorliegenden Band erstmals ein von Roland Daniels verfasstes Manuskript zum Abdruck, das von Marx und Engels für die geplante Quartalsschrift redigiert wurde. In inhaltlicher Hinsicht war zunächst nicht die systematische Ausarbeitung eigener theoretischer Positionen, sondern stattdessen die polemisch geführte Auseinandersetzung mit junghegelianischen und sozialistischen Zeitgenossen das Anliegen. Im Fokus der Kritik von Marx und Engels stand dabei allerdings nicht Feuerbach (wie bislang zumeist angenommen), sondern Max Stirner, der Autor des radikal-individualistischen Werkes „Der Einzige und sein Eigentum". Es konnte nachgewiesen werden, dass der Großteil dessen, was den Rezipienten des vergangenen Jahrhunderts als Kapitel „I. Feuerbach" präsentiert wurde, ursprünglich in Auseinandersetzung mit Stirner niedergeschrieben wurde. Dies gilt auch für die Genese solch zentraler Begrifflichkeiten wie „Ideologie" und „Kleinbürger". Zudem finden sich hier zahlreiche Exkurse, in denen Marx und Engels ihre eigenen Positionen darlegen (Darstellungen der geschichtlichen Entwicklung des deutschen Bürgertums, des Verhältnisses von geistiger zu materieller Herrschaft und der Geschichte des Privateigentums). Erst im Laufe dieser Auseinandersetzung trafen Marx und Engels die Entscheidung, ihre Auffassung in einem eigenständigen Kapitel darzulegen und mit einer Kritik Feuerbachs zu verbinden. Zu diesem Zweck gliederten sie zentrale Textteile der Stirner- und Bauer-Kritik aus den Kontexten ihrer Abfassung aus. Diese Textentwicklungen werden im Apparatband detailliert dokumentiert. Durch den textkritischen Apparat mit seiner diskursiven Variantendarbietung wird der Abfassungsprozess transparent und insbesondere auch die intensive Zusammenarbeit von Marx und Engels an den Manuskripten nachvollziehbar.

^ Marx, Karl. Simon, Lawrence (ed.).

The German Ideology . Hackett Publishing Co. p. 107.

^ Marx , p. 120.

^ Karl Marx. "The German Ideology". Literary Theory: An Anthology. 2nd ed. Oxford: Blackwell, 1998. 653–58. Print.

^ Marx, Karl, 2004. “The German Ideology”. Literary Theory: An Anthology. Eds. Julie Riv-kin and Michael Ryan. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, pp. 653-8.

^ Driscoll, Mark W. (2020).

The Whites are Enemies of Heaven: Climate Caucasianism and Asian Ecological Protection . Durham: Duke University Press .

ISBN 978-1-4780-1121-7 .

Further reading [ edit ] Terrell Carver and Daniel Blank, Marx and Engels's German Ideology Manuscripts: Presentation and Analysis of the "Feuerbach Chapter." New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014.

–––, Political History of the Editions of Marx and Engels's "German Ideology Manuscripts." New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014.

Sarah Johnson, " Farewell to the German ideology ," in Journal of the History of Ideas 83, no.1, 2022.

Margaret A. Rose, Reading the Young Marx and Engels: Poetry, Parody, and the Censor.

London: Croon Helm, 1978.

External links [ edit ] The German Ideology ( Marxists.org ) The German Ideology , English-language edition of book published by Progress Publishers , PDF format.

v t e Works by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels Marx Das Kapital Das Kapital, Volume I (1867) Das Kapital, Volume II (1885, posthumous) Das Kapital, Volume III (1894, posthumous) Other works Scorpion and Felix (1837) Oulanem (1839) The Difference Between the Democritean and Epicurean Philosophy of Nature (1841) " The Philosophical Manifesto of the Historical School of Law " (1842) Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right (1843, published 1927) " On the Jewish Question " (1843) " Notes on James Mill " (1844) Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 (1844, published 1932) " Theses on Feuerbach " (1845, published 1888) The Poverty of Philosophy (1847) " Wage Labour and Capital " (1847) The Class Struggles in France, 1848–1850 (1850) The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (1852) Grundrisse (1857, published 1939) A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (1859) Theories of Surplus Value (three volumes, 1862) " Value, Price and Profit " (1865) " The Belgian Massacres " (1869) " The Civil War in France " (1871) Critique of the Gotha Programme (1875) Mathematical manuscripts (1968) Notebooks on the history of technology Marx and Engels The Holy Family (1844) The German Ideology (1845, published 1932) The Communist Manifesto (1848) The Civil War in the United States (1861) Engels The Condition of the Working Class in England (1845) Principles of Communism (1847) The Peasant War in Germany (1850) " The Part Played by Labour in the Transition from Ape to Man " (1876) Anti-Dühring (1878) Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (1880) Dialectics of Nature (1883) The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State (1884) Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy (1886) A Contribution to the History of Primitive Christianity (1894) Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany (1896, posthumous) Collections Marx/Engels Collected Works (1975–2004) Marx-Engels-Gesamtausgabe (1975–today) Karl Marx Library (1971–1977) Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_German_Ideology&oldid=1280380353 " Categories : 1932 non-fiction books Books by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels Historical materialism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2010 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Russian-language text This page was last edited on 14 March 2025, at 08:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The German Ideology 27 languages Add topic

