Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mission concept 2 Mission design 3 Proposed payload 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents THEO 2 languages 한국어 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Orbiter mission to Enceladus This article is about the proposed space mission. For other uses, see Theo (disambiguation) .

THEO Names Testing the Habitability of Enceladus's Ocean (THEO) Mission type Astrobiology reconnaissance Operator NASA Mission duration proposed: 6-month science phase [ 1 ] Spacecraft properties Spacecraft THEO Payload mass ≈80 kg [ 2 ] Dimensions cylindrical: 4.5 m height  × 1. m diameter [ 2 ] Power 594 W from a 72 m 2 solar array Start of mission Launch date 2024 if selected for development End of mission Disposal proposed deorbit onto Tethys Enceladus orbiter Orbits >600 [ 2 ] THEO ( Testing the Habitability of Enceladus's Ocean ) is a feasibility study for a New Frontiers class orbiter mission to Enceladus that would directly sample its south pole water plumes in order to study its internal habitability and to search for biosignatures .

[ 2 ] Specifically, it would take advantage of the direct sampling opportunities of a subsurface ocean.

The study concept was produced by the 2015 Jet Propulsion Laboratory Planetary Science Summer School under the guidance of TeamX.

[ 1 ] The study has not yet been formally proposed for funding.

Mission concept [ edit ] Enceladus's south pole - Geysers spray water from many locations along the 'tiger stripes' feature.

Artist's impression of possible hydrothermal activity on Enceladus.

A plume of water vapor and ice spews from Enceladus's south polar region, offering a unique opportunity for a low-cost mission in the search for life and habitable environments beyond Earth.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The THEO mission would further understanding of life and habitability in the Solar System by addressing (i) the limits of life under colder, fainter Sun conditions, (ii) the importance of hydrothermal alteration in the origin of life , and (iii) the distribution of molecules in the Solar System that may have served as the precursors for life.

The Cassini mission data suggest that this plume, sourced by a liquid reservoir beneath the moon's icy crust, contain organics , salts, and water-rock interaction derivatives. Thus, the ingredients for life as we know it are available in Enceladus's subsurface ocean.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] The THEO mission would primarily focus on whether Enceladus is habitable.

[ 2 ] It would not look for life forms directly, but for higher abundances of certain molecules, ratios of organic compounds , or chains of amino acids could all be biosignatures that all give away the presence of life.

[ 6 ] Mission design [ edit ] The trajectory of THEO would obtain the needed kinetic energy with one Venus and two Earth gravity assists . THEO would reduce its velocity (delta-v) by making flybys of Saturn moons Titan, Rhea, Dione, Tethys, and Enceladus before the Enceladus orbit insertion.

[ 2 ] The data would be collected from three orbital attitudes (500 km, 100 km, 30 km) with each representing a separate mission phase.

[ 2 ] More than 600 science orbits are expected over the span of nominal six-month mission. At the end of the mission, and according to planetary protection protocols, the orbiter will be sent on an impact trajectory to Tethys , where it will be discarded.

[ 2 ] Proposed payload [ edit ] This mission concept includes remote sensing and in situ analyses with: [ 1 ] [ 2 ] a mass spectrometer (SWAMP) a sub-mm radiometer - spectrometer (WAVES) a camera (DRIPS) a magnetometer (OSMOSIS) doppler tracking (GEISER) These instruments (total mass ≈80 kg) were selected to address four key questions for ascertaining the habitability of Enceladus's ocean within the context of the moon's geological activity: [ 1 ] How are the plumes and ocean connected?

Are the abiotic conditions of the ocean suitable for habitability ?

How stable is the ocean environment?

Is there evidence of biological processes?

See also [ edit ] Astronomy portal Biology portal Abiogenesis Astrobiology Enceladus Explorer (EnEx) Enceladus Life Finder (ELF) Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability (ELSAH) Europa Clipper Explorer of Enceladus and Titan (E 2 T) Journey to Enceladus and Titan (JET) Life Investigation For Enceladus (LIFE) References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e MacKenzie, Shannon M.; Caswell, Tess E.; Phillips-Lander, Charity M.; Stavros, E. Natasha; et al. (2 May 2016). "THEO Concept Mission: Testing the Habitability of Enceladus's Ocean".

Advances in Space Research .

58 (6): 1117– 1137.

arXiv : 1605.00579 .

Bibcode : 2016AdSpR..58.1117M .

doi : 10.1016/j.asr.2016.05.037 .

S2CID 119112894 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j John, K. K.; Wynne, J. J.; Powell, K.E.; MacKenzie, S. M. (2016).

THEO Mission Concept: Testing the Habitability of Enceladus's Ocean (PDF) . 47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference.

^ Waite, J. H.; Combi, M. R.; et al. (2006). "Cassini Ion and Neutral Mass Spectrometer: Enceladus Plume Composition and Structure".

Science .

311 (5766): 1419– 22.

Bibcode : 2006Sci...311.1419W .

doi : 10.1126/science.1121290 .

PMID 16527970 .

S2CID 3032849 .

^ Wall, Mike (May 7, 2015).

"Ocean on Saturn Moon Enceladus May Have Potential Energy Source to Support Life" .

Space.com . Retrieved 2015-08-15 .

^ "Cassini Tastes Organic Material at Saturn's Geyser Moon" .

NASA . March 26, 2008. Archived from the original on 2021-07-20 . Retrieved 2008-03-26 .

^ Boyle, Rebecca (Mar 25, 2016).

"Exploring the Oceans of the Outer Solar System" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 2016-05-05 .

v t e Astrobiology Disciplines Astrochemistry Astrophysics Atmospheric sciences Biochemistry Evolutionary biology Exoplanetology Geomicrobiology Microbiology Paleontology Planetary oceanography Planetary science Main topics Abiogenesis Allan Hills 84001 Biomolecule Biosignature Drake equation Earliest known life forms Earth analog Extraterrestrial life Extraterrestrial sample curation Extremophiles Hypothetical types of biochemistry List of microorganisms tested in outer space Ocean planet Panspermia Planetary protection Search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) Yamato meteorite Planetary habitability Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems Habitable zone for complex life List of potentially habitable exoplanets Tholin Superhabitable planet Space missions Earth orbit BIO BIOCORE Biolab Bion BIOPAN Biosatellite program E-MIST ERA Eu:CROPIS EXOSTACK EXPOSE Lunar Micro Ecosystem O/OREOS OREOcube Tanpopo VEGGIE Mars Beagle 2 Fobos-Grunt Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover Mars 2020 Perseverance rover Phoenix Tianwen-1 Zhurong rover Trace Gas Orbiter Viking Comets and asteroids Hayabusa2 OSIRIS-REx Rosetta Heliocentric BioSentinel Planned Dragonfly Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover Proposed Breakthrough Enceladus BRUIE CAESAR Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder‎ Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Orbilander Europa Lander ExoLance Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Mars sample return mission Oceanus THEO Trident Cancelled and undeveloped Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection Kazachok Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher MELOS Northern Light Red Dragon Terrestrial Planet Finder Institutions and programs Astrobiology Society of Britain Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Breakthrough Starshot Carl Sagan Institute Center for Life Detection Science European Astrobiology Network Association NASA Astrobiology Institute Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Ocean Worlds Exploration Program Spanish Astrobiology Center‎ Category Commons v t e NASA Planetary Missions Program Office Discovery program Missions Main NEAR Shoemaker Mars Pathfinder Lunar Prospector Stardust Genesis CONTOUR † MESSENGER Deep Impact Dawn Kepler GRAIL InSight Lucy Psyche DAVINCI VERITAS Opportunity ASPERA-3 EPOXI NExT Moon Mineralogy Mapper Strofio MEGANE Proposals Finalists Mission 12 Comet Hopper Titan Mare Explorer Mission 13 and 14 NEOCam Mission 15 and 16 Io Volcano Observer Trident Candidates Enceladus Life Finder Icebreaker Life ISOCHRON JET LIFE MANTIS Mars Geyser Hopper Moon Diver PADME Phobos Surveyor Whipple New Frontiers program Missions New Horizons Juno OSIRIS-REx Dragonfly Proposals Finalists Mission 2 MoonRise Mission 3 MoonRise SAGE Mission 4 CAESAR Candidates CONDOR CORSAIR ELF ELSAH Oceanus SPRITE VICI VISAGE VOX Solar System Exploration program Missions DART JUICE instruments Europa Clipper Underline indicates active current missions Italics indicate missions yet to launch Symbol † indicates failure en route or before intended mission data returned Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=THEO&oldid=1301125222 " Categories : Enceladus New Frontiers program proposals Proposed astrobiology space missions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 06:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents THEO 2 languages Add topic

