Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Contents Toggle Contents subsection 2.1 The 28 articles 2.1.1 The chief articles of faith (theses) 2.1.2 Abuses corrected 2.2 Conclusion 3 Influence of the Augsburg Confession Toggle Influence of the Augsburg Confession subsection 3.1 Years of adoption 3.2 In music 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Works cited 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Augsburg Confession 45 languages Alemannisch العربية Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ქართული Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1530 primary confession of faith of the Lutheran tradition This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( November 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Lutheranism Background Christianity Start of the Reformation Reformation Protestantism Doctrine and theology Bible Old Testament New Testament Creeds Apostles' Creed Nicene Creed Athanasian Creed Book of Concord Augsburg Confession Apology of the Augsburg Confession Luther's Small / Large Catechism Smalcald Articles Treatise on the Power and Primacy of the Pope Formula of Concord Distinctive theological concepts Theology of Martin Luther Justification Law and Gospel Sola gratia Sola scriptura Christology Sanctification Two kingdoms catholicity Two states of the Church Priesthood of all believers Divine Providence Marian theology Theology of the Cross Sacramental Union Other relevant topics Homosexuality Sacraments and worship Baptism Eucharist Confession Confirmation Matrimony Anointing of the Sick Holy Orders Divine Service Matins Vespers Liturgical calendar Calendar of saints Lutheran hymn Lutheran hymnwriters Normative principle Lutheran art Organization Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference Global Confessional & Missional Lutheran Forum International Lutheran Council Lutheran World Federation Denominations Lutheranism by region Movements History of Lutheranism Crypto-Lutherans Gnesio-Lutherans Lutheran orthodoxy Pietists Radical Pietism Haugeans Laestadians Finnish Awakening Old Lutherans Neo-Lutherans High church Lutherans Confessional Lutheranism Key figures Missionaries John Campanius Bartholomäus Ziegenbalg Hans Egede Johann Heinrich Callenberg Johann Phillip Fabricius Paul Henkel John Christian Frederick Heyer Karl Graul Martti Rautanen Wilhelm Sihler F. C. D. Wyneken Hans Paludan Smith Schreuder Lars Olsen Skrefsrud Ludwig Ingwer Nommensen Onesimos Nesib Paul Olaf Bodding Johann Flierl Christian Keyser Jens Christensen Bible Translators Martin Luther Casiodoro de Reina Kjell Magne Yri Onesimos Nesib Aster Ganno Kristian Osvald Viderø Jákup Dahl Bartholomäus Ziegenbalg Johann Phillip Fabricius William Tyndale John Rogers George Constantine Jozef Roháček Johannes Avetaranian Guðbrandur Þorláksson Ludvig Olsen Fossum Hans Egede / Paul Egede Otto Fabricius Nils Vibe Stockfleth Olaus Petri / Laurentius Petri Martti Rautanen Primož Trubar Jurij Dalmatin Ludwig Ingwer Nommensen Sebastian Krelj Mikael Agricola Norwegian Bible Society Swedish Bible Society Samuel Ludwik Zasadius Stanislovas Rapolionis Laurentius Andreae Hans Tausen Olaf M. Norlie Jonas Bretkūnas Hans Paludan Smith Schreuder Antonio Brucioli Mikołaj Jakubica Matthias Bel Johann Ernst Glück William F. Beck Theologians Martin Luther / Katharina von Bora Philip Melanchthon Johannes Bugenhagen Johannes Brenz Justus Jonas Hans Tausen Laurentius Petri Olaus Petri Mikael Agricola Matthias Flacius Martin Chemnitz Johann Gerhard Abraham Calovius Johannes Andreas Quenstedt Johann Wilhelm Baier Philipp Spener David Hollaz August Hermann Francke Henry Muhlenberg Lars Levi Laestadius Charles Porterfield Krauth C. F. W. Walther Søren Kierkegaard Albrecht Ritschl Wilhelm Herrmann F. W. Stellhorn Rudolf Otto Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Bultmann Paul Tillich Hermann Sasse Dietrich Bonhoeffer Wolfhart Pannenberg Robert Jenson v t e The Augsburg Confession ( German : Augsburger Bekenntnis ), also known as the Augustan Confession or the Augustana from its Latin name, Confessio Augustana , is the primary confession of faith of the Lutheran Church and one of the most important documents of the Protestant Reformation . The Augsburg Confession was written in both German and Latin and was presented by a number of German rulers and free-cities at the Diet of Augsburg on 25 June 1530.

The Holy Roman Emperor , Charles V , had called on the Princes and Free Territories in Germany to explain their religious convictions in an attempt to restore religious and political unity in the Holy Roman Empire and rally support against the Ottoman invasion in the 16th-century Siege of Vienna . It is the fourth document contained in the Lutheran Book of Concord .

Background [ edit ] Diet of Augsburg by Christian Beyer .

Philipp Melanchthon , Martin Luther , and Justus Jonas had already drafted a statement of their theological views in the Articles of Schwabach in 1529, [ 1 ] when on 21 January 1530, Emperor Charles V issued letters from Bologna , inviting the Imperial Diet to meet in Augsburg on 8 April for the purpose of discussing and deciding various important questions. Although the writ of invitation was couched in very peaceful language, it was received with suspicion by some of the Protestants. Landgrave Philip of Hesse hesitated to attend the diet, but the Elector John of Saxony , who received the writ 11 March, on 14 March directed Martin Luther, Justus Jonas, Johannes Bugenhagen and Philipp Melanchthon to meet in Torgau , where he was, and present a summary of the Lutheran faith to be laid before the Holy Roman Emperor at the diet.

[ 2 ] This summary has received the name of the "Torgau Articles". On 3 April, the elector and reformers started from Torgau , and reached Coburg on 23 April. There, Luther was left behind because he was an outlaw according to the Diet of Worms . The rest reached Augsburg on 2 May. On the journey, Melanchthon worked on a larger draft based on the Torgau articles, and sent this to Luther at Coburg on 11 May, who approved it. Several alterations were suggested to Melanchthon in his conferences with Jonas, the Saxon chancellor Christian Beyer , the conciliatory Christopher von Stadion , bishop of Augsburg , and the imperial secretary Alfonso de Valdes .

[ 2 ] On 23 June, the final form of the text was adopted in the presence of the Elector John of Saxony, the Landgrave Philip of Hesse , the Margrave George of Brandenburg , the Dukes Ernest and Francis of Lüneburg , the representatives of Nuremberg and Reutlingen , and other counselors, besides twelve theologians. After the reading, the confession was signed by the Elector John of Saxony , Margrave George of Brandenburg, Duke Ernest of Lüneburg , the Landgrave Philip of Hesse, the Prince Wolfgang of Anhalt , the representatives of Nuremberg and Reutlingen, and probably also the electoral prince John Frederick and Duke Francis of Lüneburg.

[ 2 ] During the diet, the cities of Weißenburg in Bayern , Heilbronn , Kempten , and Windesheim also expressed their concurrence with the confession. The emperor had ordered the confession to be presented to him at the next session, 24 June. When the Protestant princes asked that it be read in public, their petition was refused, and efforts were made to prevent the public reading of the document altogether. The Protestant princes declared that they would not part with the confession until its reading should be allowed.

[ 2 ] The 25th was then fixed for the day of its presentation. In order to exclude the people, the little chapel of the episcopal palace was appointed in place of the spacious city hall, where the meetings of the diet were held. The two Saxon chancellors Christian Beyer and Gregor Brück , the former with the plain German copy, the other in traditional Latin language, against the wish of the emperor stepped into the middle of the assembly. The reading of the German version of the text by Christian Beyer lasted two hours and was so distinct that every word could be heard outside. The reading being over, the copies were handed to the emperor. The German copy he gave to the imperial chancellor, the Elector of Mainz. The Latin copy he took away. Neither of the copies is now extant.

[ 2 ] The first official publication ( Editio princeps ) was edited by Philipp Melanchthon, a professor at the University of Wittenberg and a close colleague and friend of Martin Luther.

Contents [ edit ] The 28 articles [ edit ] The Augsburg Confession consists of 28 articles presented by Lutheran princes and representatives of "free cities" at the Diet of Augsburg that set forward what the Lutherans believed, taught and confessed in positive (theses) and negative (antitheses) statements.  The theses are 21 Chief Articles of Faith describing the normative principles of Christian faith held by the Lutherans; the antitheses are seven statements describing what they viewed as abuses of the Christian faith present in the Roman Catholic church.

The chief articles of faith (theses) [ edit ] Article Title Description I God Christians believe in the Triune God and reject other interpretations regarding the nature of God.

II Original Sin The nature of man is sinful, described as being without fear of God, without trust of God and with concupiscence .  Sin is redeemed through Baptism and the Holy Spirit.

III The Son of God The incarnation, that is, the union of the fully human with the fully divine in the person of Jesus.

Jesus Christ alone brings about the reconciliation of humanity with God.

IV Justification By Faith Man cannot be justified before God through our own abilities; we are wholly reliant on Jesus Christ for reconciliation with God.  (This is often described as the one article by which the "Lutheran church stands or falls".) V The Office of Preaching To ensure that the gospel of Jesus Christ is proclaimed throughout the world, Christ has established His office of the holy ministry.

VI Of The New Obedience Good deeds of Christians are the fruits of faith and salvation, not a price paid for them.

VII Of The Church There is one holy Christian church , and it is found wherever the gospel is preached in its truth and purity and the sacraments are administered according to the gospel.

VIII What The Church Is Despite what hypocrisy may exist in the church (and among men), the Word and the Sacraments are always valid because they are instituted by Christ, no matter what the sins may be of the one who administers them.

IX Of Baptism Baptism is necessary, and that through Baptism is offered the grace of God.

Children are baptized as an offering to them of God's grace.

X Of the Lord's Supper Christ's body and blood are truly present and are distributed to communicants. They reject those that teach otherwise .

XI Of Confession Private absolution should remain in the church, though a believer does not need to enumerate all of his sins as it is impossible for a man to enumerate all of the sins for which he should be forgiven.

XII Of Repentance Repentance comes in two parts: in contrition for sins committed according to the Law and through faith offered through the Gospel.  A believer can never be free from sin, nor live outside of the grace of God.

XIII Of the Use of the Sacraments The Sacraments (Baptism and the Eucharist) are physical manifestations of God's Word and His commitment to us.  The Sacraments are never just physical elements, but have God's word and promises bound to them.

XIV Of Ecclesiastical Order Only those who are "properly called" may publicly preach or administer the Sacraments.

XV Of Ecclesiastical Usages Church holidays, calendars and festivals are useful for religious observance, but that observance and ritual is not necessary for salvation.  Human traditions (such as observances, fasts, distinctions in eating meats) that are taught as a way to "merit" grace work in opposition to the Gospel.

XVI Of Civil Affairs Secular governments and vocations are considered to be part of God's natural orders; Christians are free to serve in government and the military and to engage in the business and vocations of the world.  Laws are to be followed unless they are commandments to sin.

XVII Of Christ's Return to Judgment Christ will return to raise the dead and judge the world; the godly will be given everlasting joy, and the ungodly will be "tormented without end".  This article rejects notions of a millennial kingdom before the resurrection of the dead.

XVIII Of Free Will Men have, to some extent, free will in the realm of "civil righteousness" (or "things subject to reason"), but that we do not have free will in "spiritual righteousness".  In other words, we have no free choice when it comes to salvation.  Faith is not the work of men, but of the Holy Spirit.

XIX Of the Cause of Sin Sin is caused not by God but by "the will of the wicked", turning away from God.

XX Of Good Works Justification by faith does not somehow condemn good works; faith causes them to do good works as a sign of our justification (or salvation), not a requirement for salvation.

XXI Of the Worship of the Saints Saints are kept, not as saviors or intercessors to God, but rather as examples and inspirations to our own faith and life.

Abuses corrected [ edit ] Article Title Description XXII Of Both Kinds In The Sacrament (Eucharist) It is proper to offer communicants the consecrated bread and wine, not just the bread.

XXIII Of the Marriage of Priests Lutherans permit their clergy to enter the institution of marriage, for the reasons that the early Church bishops were married, that God blesses marriage as an order of creation, and because marriage and procreation is the natural outlet for human sexual desire.

XXIV Of the Mass Lutherans retain the practice of the Mass, but only as a public gathering for the purposes of community worship and the receiving of the Eucharist.  Lutherans reject the practice of using the Mass as a "work" for both salvation and worldly (monetary) gain.

XXV Of Confession Lutherans uphold the need for confession and absolution, but reject the notion that Confession should induce guilt or anxiety to the Christian.  Absolution is offered for all sin, not just sins that can be recounted in a confession, as it is impossible for a man to know all of his transgressions.

XXVI Of the Distinction of Meats Human traditions that hold fasting and special observances with dietary restrictions as a means of gaining the favor of God are contrary to the gospel.  While fasting and other practices are useful spiritual practices, they do not justify man nor offer salvation.

XXVII Of Monastic Vows Man cannot achieve purity in community or isolation from the rest of the world, and perfection cannot be attained by any vow taken or actions of man alone.

XXVIII Of Ecclesiastical Power The only power given to priests or bishops is the power offered through Scripture to preach, teach and administer the sacraments.  The powers given to the clergy in issues of government or the military are granted and respected only through civil means; they are not civil rulers of governments and the military by divine right.

Conclusion [ edit ] "That in doctrine and ceremonies nothing has been received on our part against Scripture or the Church Catholic." Signatures of several secular leaders in Saxony.

Influence of the Augsburg Confession [ edit ] An illustration of the first 21 articles by Wenceslas Hollar .

The Augsburg Confession became the primary confessional document for the Lutheran movement, even without the contribution of Martin Luther.  Following the public reading of the Augsburg Confession in June 1530, the expected response by Charles V and the Vatican representatives at the Diet of Augsburg was not immediately forthcoming.  Following debate between the court of Charles V and the Vatican representatives, the official response known as the Pontifical Confutation of the Augsburg Confession was produced to the Diet, though the document was so poorly prepared that the document was never published for widespread distribution, nor presented to the Lutherans at the Diet.

In September, Charles V declared the response to be sufficient and gave the Lutheran princes until 15 April 1531 to respond to the demands of the Confutation.  In response, Philip Melanchthon wrote a lengthy and sustained argument both supporting the Augsburg Confession and refuting the arguments made in the Confutation. This document became known as the Apology of the Augsburg Confession and was soon translated into German and was widely distributed and read throughout Germany.

The Lutheran princes at the diet concurrently agreed to a military alliance in the event of action by Charles V known as the Schmalkaldic League .  By 1535, the League admitted any city or state to the alliance that gave official assent to the Augsburg Confession and the Apology.  Significantly, the Confession was translated into English in 1536, and King Henry VIII was given opportunity to sign the confession and join the league, but theological and political disputes would prevent the English church from joining.

The English translation of the Augsburg Confession and German Lutheran theologians would influence the composition of the first of the Anglican articles of faith started in the latter 1530s and culminating with the Thirty-Nine Articles in 1563.  In Scandinavia the Danish-Norwegian king Christian III marched into Copenhagen on 6 August 1536 and six days later he carried out a coup that established the Reformation in Denmark and the start of the Reformation in Norway.

Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor receives the Augsburg Confession, Augsburg 1530.

The three bishops who dwelt in Copenhagen were arrested and the rest were tracked down and likewise arrested. The official reason was their hesitation to elect Christian as king and other alleged criminal acts. The real reason was that Christian wanted to kill two birds with one stone: carrying through a Lutheran Reformation and confiscating the bishops' properties, the profits from which was needed to cover the expenses of the recently ended civil war.

In 1540, Philipp Melanchthon produced a revised edition, the Variata , which was signed by John Calvin . Many Lutheran churches specify in their official documents that they subscribe to the "Unaltered Augsburg Confession", as opposed to the Variata .

The political tensions between the Schmalkaldic League and the forces of Charles V and the Vatican eventually led to the Schmalkaldic War in 1546–1547, which ended the 1532 Nuremberg Religious Peace and was won convincingly by Charles V.  The war did not resolve the religious and political situation.  Eight years later, the Lutheran princes and Charles V agreed to the Peace of Augsburg , which granted Lutheranism legal status within the Holy Roman Empire.

Theological disputes within the expanding sphere of Lutheranism to other territories in the latter half of the 16th century led to the compilation of a definitive set of Lutheran Confessions in the Book of Concord in 1580.  The Book of Concord includes the Augsburg Confession and the Apology of the Augsburg Confession as the foundational confessions of the Lutheran faith.

Years of adoption [ edit ] State Year the AC was adopted Electorate of Saxony 1530 Free City of Lübeck 1530 Württemberg 1534 Anhalt-Köthen 1534–35 Pomerania 1534–35 Bishopric of Lübeck 1535 Principality of Lippe 1538 (switched to a Reformed confession in 1605) Mark Brandenburg 1539 Mecklenburg 1549 County of Schaumburg 1559 Hessen-Kassel 1566 (However, this was in name only, as Hessen-Kassel was Reformed even in 1566. In 1605 the Reformed faith was officially decreed.) Duchy of Brunswick-Lüneburg 1568 Oldenburg-Land 1573 Bremen 1566/1580 Verden 1566/1580 Sweden (also Finland ) 1593, via the Uppsala Synod Denmark (also in Norway and Iceland ) 1665 In music [ edit ] Felix Mendelssohn's Symphony No. 5 (actually his second symphony in order of composition) was composed to celebrate the 300th anniversary of the Augsburg Confession and thus bears the title The Reformation Symphony . The symphony, however, was not commissioned for the celebrations, because of either the composer's Jewish origins or the inappropriateness of a symphony for the celebrations. Instead, Eduard Grell's work for four men's voices a capella was commissioned.

See also [ edit ] Confutatio Augustana and Confessio Augustana being presented Christianity portal Augsburg Confession Variata Confessio Catholica Confutatio Augustana Evangelical Church of the Augsburg Confession in Poland References [ edit ] ^ Johann Michael Reu, The Augsburg Confession (1930), p. 28.

^ a b c d e Kolde 1914 .

Works cited [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication in the public domain : Kolde, T. (1914). "Augsburg Confession And Its Apology". In Jackson, Samuel Macauley (ed.).

New Schaff–Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge (third ed.). London and New York: Funk and Wagnalls. pp.

361– 363.

Further reading [ edit ] May, Gerhard. "Augsburg Confession." In The Encyclopedia of Christianity , edited by Erwin Fahlbusch and Geoffrey William Bromiley, 157–159. Vol. 1. Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 1999.

ISBN 0802824137 Reu, Johann Michael , The Augsburg Confession: A Collection of Sources with an Historical Introduction . St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1983.

Forell, George , The Augsburg Confession; a Contemporary Commentary . Augsburg Publishing House, 1968.

ISBN 0806608153 External links [ edit ] The full text of Augsburg Confession at Wikisource The Augsburg Confession (1530) in Latin with a parallel English translation and with notes on the differences in the 1540 edition (Articles I — VII); from Philip Schaff 's Creeds of the Evangelical Protestant Churches at the Christian Classics Ethereal Library Augsburg Confession (1530) , including articles XXII — XXVIII Augsburg Confession (1530) , complete annotated translation in modern English, with links to source material where available online; translated by Nathaniel J. Biebert ( Red Brick Parsonage , 2018-2019).

Augsburg Confession - Background , brief overview of the historical background of the Augsburg Confession, with paintings of Elector John the Steadfast and Philipp Melanchthon, and a 1575 bird's-eye view of Augsburg The Roman Confutation (1530) , in an English translation, compares each articles of the confession to Catholic beliefs.

Audio recording of the first part of the Augsburg Confession in Latin with text Augsburg Confession public domain audiobook at LibriVox A Chronicle of the Augsburg Confession by Charles Porterfield Krauth , Philadelphia: J. Fredrick Smith, 1878.

Augsburg Confession in The Lutheran Cyclopedia (1899) edited by Henry Eyster Jacobs Augsburg Confession in the Concordia Cyclopedia ( page 1 )( page 2 ) Augsburg Confession in the Christian Cyclopedia An Orthodox Response – Summary of Orthodox Patriarch Jeremias II's letter of 15 May 1576, in which he compares each article of the confession to Orthodox Christian beliefs The Roman Catholic Reception of the Augsburg Confession by Robert Kress ( JSTOR ) v t e The Lutheran Confessions — Documents of the Book of Concord Apostles' Creed Nicene Creed Athanasian Creed Augsburg Confession Apology of the Augsburg Confession Smalcald Articles Treatise on the Power and Primacy of the Pope Luther's Small Catechism Luther's Large Catechism Formula of Concord v t e History of Lutheranism Start of the Reformation Events Ninety-five Theses Heidelberg Disputation Leipzig Debate Marburg Colloquy Diet of Speyer (1529) Protestation at Speyer Articles of Schwabach Presentation of the Augsburg Confession Nuremberg Religious Peace Reformation in Denmark–Norway and Holstein Finland Germany Iceland Sweden Reformers Martin Luther Katharina von Bora Philip Melanchthon Johannes Bugenhagen Johannes Brenz Justus Jonas Argula von Grumbach Petrus Särkilahti Mikael Agricola Stephan Agricola Nicolaus von Amsdorf Laurentius Andreae Olaus Petri Laurentius Petri Stephan Praetorius Johann Pfeffinger Frederick the Wise Early turmoil Events Dissemination of the Augsburg Confession Variata Colloquy of Worms (1540–1541) Diet of Regensburg Regensburg Interim Schmalkaldic War Augsburg Interim Leipzig Interim Peace of Passau Peace of Augsburg Colloquy of Worms (1557) Counter-Reformation Council of Trent § Protestant response Publication of the Magdeburg Centuries Adiaphoristic controversies (first second) Controversy on the Descent into Hell Presentation of the Greek Augsburg Confession Signing of the Formula of Concord Liturgical struggle Uppsala Synod People Philip Melanchthon Matthias Flacius Nicolaus Gallus Cyriacus Spangenberg Joachim Westphal Andreas Musculus Victorinus Strigel Johannes Agricola Andreas Osiander John the Magnanimous Factions Crypto-Calvinism Sacramentarians Philippists Ubiquitarians Gnesio-Lutherans Crypto-Lutherans Orthodox and Scholastic periods Early Acceptance of the Book of Concord Martin Chemnitz Colloquy of Mumpelgart Jakob Andreae Nikolaus Selnecker David Chytraeus Matthias Hafenreffer Leonhard Hutter Aegidius Hunnius Stephan Praetorius High Johann Gerhard J. A. Quenstedt Abraham Calovius Georg Calixtus Nicolaus Hunnius Jesper Brochmand Salomo Glassius Johann Hülsemann J. C. Dannhauer J. F. König Johannes Musaeus J. W. Baier Thirty Years' War Late David Hollatz Christian Scriver V. E. Löscher J. M. Goeze Salzburg Protestants Landlers Speculative or critical theologies Wolffian Johann Salomo Semler Johann David Michaelis Johann Christoph Döderlein Old Tübingen school Gottlob Christian Storr Friedrich Gottlieb Süskind Johann Friedrich Flatt Kantian Christoph Friedrich von Ammon Julius Wegscheider Wilhelm Gesenius Albrecht Ritschl Adolf von Harnack Wilhelm Herrmann Hegelian Karl Daub Philip Marheineke David Strauss Ferdinand Christian Baur Richard Adelbert Lipsius Otto Pfleiderer Moderate Franz Volkmar Reinhard Karl Gottlieb Bretschneider Wilhelm Martin Leberecht de Wette Transitional Johann Gottfried Herder Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi Friedrich Schleiermacher Revivals Pietist Martin Moller Johann Arndt Jakob Böhme J. V. Andreae P. J. Spener J. W. Petersen A. H. Francke J. F. Buddeus J. A. Bengel G. C. Knapp Awakening J. G. Hamann Hans Nielsen Hauge Haugeanism Paavo Ruotsalainen Finnish Awakening Claus Harms Lars Levi Laestadius Laestadianism Carl Olof Rosenius N. F. S. Grundtvig August Tholuck Zillertal Valley expulsion Neo-Lutheran Repristination E. W. Hengstenberg F. A. Philippi F. G. Hedberg Carl Paul Caspari C. P. Krauth L .A. Gotwald Erlangen G. C. A. von Harless J. W. F. Höfling Gottfried Thomasius J. C. K. von Hofmann Franz Delitzsch K. F. A. Kahnis Theodosius Harnack C. E. Luthardt F. H. R. von Frank Paul Althaus Werner Elert High Church A. F. C. Vilmar F. J. Stahl A. F. O. Münchmeyer J. K. W. Löhe Theodor Kliefoth Heinrich Hansen Old Lutheran Germany Old Lutheran schism Background J. G. Scheibel Eduard Huschke Henrik Steffens H. E. F. Guericke G. P. E. Huschke Free churches Australia / New Guinea August Kavel Gotthard Fritzsche Johann Flierl Lutheran Church of Australia United States Martin Stephan J. A. A. Grabau Wilhelm Sihler F. C. D. Wyneken C. F. W. Walther H. A. Preus F. W. Stellhorn Synodical Conference of North America Present Confessional Lutheranism Homosexuality v t e Martin Luther Bibliography Resources about Martin Luther Works Ninety-five Theses (1517) Sermon on Indulgences and Grace (1518) To the Christian Nobility of the German Nation (1520) On the Babylonian Captivity of the Church (1520) On the Freedom of a Christian (1520) Commentary on the Magnificat (1521) Against Henry, King of the English (1522) Luther Bible (1522, 1534) The Adoration of the Sacrament (1523) Formula missae (1523) Flood prayer (1523) Against the Murderous, Thieving Hordes of Peasants (1525) On the Bondage of the Will (1525) Against the Heavenly Prophets (1525) The Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ—Against the Fanatics (1526) Deutsche Messe (1526) Confession Concerning Christ's Supper (1528) On War Against the Turk (1529) Small Catechism (1529) Articles of Schwabach (1529) Large Catechism (1529) A Simple Way to Pray (1535) Smalcald Articles (1537) On the Councils and the Church (1539) On the Jews and Their Lies (1543) Vom Schem Hamphoras (1543) Luther's Table Talk (1566) Weimar edition of Luther's works List of hymns First Lutheran hymnal (1524) Erfurt Enchiridion (1524) Eyn geystlich Gesangk Buchleyn (1524) " Es spricht der Unweisen Mund wohl " (1524) " Gott sei gelobet und gebenedeiet " (1524) " A Mighty Fortress Is Our God " (1529) " Sie ist mir lieb, die werte Magd " (1535) " Christ unser Herr zum Jordan kam " (1543) Topics and events Reformation Lutheranism Heidelberg Disputation, 1518 Leipzig Debate, 1519 Exsurge Domine , 1520 Diet of Worms, 1521 Decet Romanum Pontificem , 1521 Marburg Colloquy, 1529 Augsburg Confession, 1530 Luther's canon Theology of Martin Luther Theology of the Cross Priesthood of all believers Sola fide Sola scriptura Two kingdoms Beerwolf (1539) Law and Gospel Marian theology Eucharist in Lutheranism Sacramental union Words of Institution Antisemitism Propaganda during the Reformation Die Lügend von S. Johanne Chrysostomo (1537 edition) People Hans and Margarethe Luther (parents) Katharina von Bora (wife) Magdalena Luther (daughter) Paul Luther (son) Albert of Brandenburg Bartholomaeus Arnoldi Erasmus Georg Rörer Johann Cochlaeus Johann Reuchlin Johann von Staupitz Justus Jonas Karl von Miltitz Andreas Karlstadt Philip Melanchthon Pope Leo X Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor Frederick the Wise Albrecht VII von Mansfeld Luther sites All Saints' Church, Wittenberg Stadtkirche Wittenberg Lutherhaus Lutherstädte Martin Luther's Birth House Martin Luther's Death House Melanchthonhaus (Wittenberg) St. Augustine's Monastery Veste Coburg (Fortress) Wartburg Castle Film and theatre Martin Luther (1923 film) Luther (1928 film) Martin Luther (1953 film) Luther (1961 play) Luther (1964 film) Luther (1974 film) Martin Luther, Heretic (1983 film) Luther (2003 film) Luther and I (2017 film) Luther Monuments Luther Monument , Washington D.C.

Luther Monument , Worms Related Luther rose Theologia Germanica Martin Luther Christian University Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg v t e Lutheranism Luther's Small Catechism The Ten Commandments Apostle's Creed Lord's Prayer Sacrament of Holy Baptism Confession Sacrament of the Eucharist Chief articles of faith in the Augsburg Confession I.

God II.

Original Sin III. The Son of God IV.

Justification By Faith V. The Office of Preaching VI. Of The New Obedience VII. Of The Church VIII. What the Church Is IX. Of Baptism X. Of the Lord's Supper XI. Of Confession XII. Of Repentance XIII. Of the Use of the Sacraments XIV.

XV.

Ecclesiastical Usages XVI. Of Civil Affairs XVII. Of Christ's Return to Judgment XVIII. Of Free Will XIX. Of the Cause of Sin XX. Of Good Works XXI. Of the Worship of the Saints Practices Divine Service Confirmation Common table prayer Sign of The Cross Matins Vespers Easter Vigil Liturgical Calendar Wreath of Christ Movements Gnesio-Lutherans Crypto-Calvinism Philippists Sacramentarians Ubiquitarians Lutheran orthodoxy Pietism Laestadianism Old Lutherans Neo-Lutheranism High Church Lutheranism Evangelical Catholicism Confessional Lutherans Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Norway Latvia Sweden Israel Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Augsburg_Confession&oldid=1292771104 " Categories : 1530 documents 16th-century Christian texts Christian statements of faith Book of Concord Reformation in Germany History of Augsburg Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from November 2010 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles containing German-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Schaff-Herzog with a title parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the Schaff-Herzog Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 18:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Augsburg Confession 45 languages Add topic

