Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 See also 4 Citations and footnotes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Domninus of Larissa 13 languages Català Deutsch فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית مصرى Polski Română Русский Suomi Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Syrian mathematician (c. 420 – c. 480) Domninus of Larissa ( Greek : Δομνῖνος ; c.

420 – c.

480 ) was an ancient Hellenistic Syrian mathematician.

Life [ edit ] Domninus of Larissa , Syria was, simultaneously with Proclus , a pupil of Syrianus . Domninus is said to have corrupted the doctrines of Plato by mixing up with them his private opinions. This called forth a treatise from Proclus, intended as a statement of the genuine principles of Platonism.

[ 1 ] Marinus writes about a rivalry between Domninus and Proclus about how Plato's work should be interpreted, [Syrianus] offered to discourse to them on either the Orphic theories or the oracles ; but Domninus wanted Orphism , Proclus the oracles, and they had not agreed when Syrianus died...

[ 2 ] The Athenian academy eventually choose Proclus' interpretation over Domninus' and Proclus would later become the head of the academy. After Proclus' promotion, Domninus left Athens and returned to Larissa.

It is said that once when Domninus was ill and coughing up blood , he took to eating copious amounts of pork , despite the fact that he was Jewish, because a physician prescribed it as a treatment.

[ 1 ] He is also said to have taught Asclepiodotus , until Asclepiodotus became so argumentative that Domninus no longer admitted him into his company.

[ 1 ] Works [ edit ] Domninus is remembered for authoring a Manual of Introductory Arithmetic ( Greek : Ἐγχειρίδιον ἀριθμητικῆς εἰσαγωγῆς ), which was edited by Boissonade and had two articles by Tannery written about it.  The Manual of Introductory Arithmetic was a concise and well arranged overview of the theory of numbers. It covered numbers, proportions and means. It is important since it is a reaction against Nicomachus ' Introductio arithmetica and a return to the doctrine of Euclid .

Domninus is also believed to have authored a tract entitled how a ratio can be taken out of a ratio ( Greek : Πῶς ἔστι λόγον ἐκ λόγου ἀφελεῖν ), which studies the manipulation of ratios into other forms.  Bulmer-Thomas believe that it was written, at least in part, by Domninus, but Heath casts some doubt on the authorship by stating that if it wasn't written by Domninus then it at least comes from the same period as him.

[ 3 ] Domninus may have also written a work entitled Elements of Arithmetic as referred to near the end of his Manual of Introductory Arithmetic , although whether or not he ever wrote this book is unknown.

See also [ edit ] Heliodorus of Larissa Citations and footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b c Damascius, Life of Isidore in the Suda, Domninos ^ Bulmer-Thomas (1970-1990) ^ Heath p. 538, (1981) References [ edit ] Heath, Thomas Little (1981).

A History of Greek Mathematics, Volume II . Dover publications.

ISBN 0-486-24074-6 .

Ivor Bulmer-Thomas , Biography in Dictionary of Scientific Biography (New York 1970–1990).

Peter Brown , The Manual of Domninus in Harvard Review of Philosophy (2000) External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Domninus of Larissa" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 FAST WorldCat 2 3 National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Greece Vatican Israel Academics zbMATH People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Domninus_of_Larissa&oldid=1273731449 " Categories : 5th-century Greek philosophers Ancient Greek mathematicians Syrian mathematicians Neoplatonists in Athens 5th-century Jews Hellenistic Jewish writers 420s births 480 deaths 5th-century Byzantine writers 5th-century mathematicians 5th-century Byzantine scientists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text This page was last edited on 3 February 2025, at 19:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Domninus of Larissa 13 languages Add topic

