Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Air treatment 2 Sense of direction 3 Structure in air-breathing forms 4 In fish 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Nose 180 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Armãneashti অসমীয়া Asturianu Atikamekw Avañe'ẽ Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Čeština ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk الدارجة Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ / inuktitut Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Лакку ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Li Niha Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova La .lojban.

Lombard Magyar Madhurâ Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pangasinan پنجابی ပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏ پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Ποντιακά Português Ripoarisch Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Scots Setswana Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ ತುಳು Türkçe Tyap Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro Walon Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Obolo Betawi Jaku Iban Kumoring Yerwa Kanuri Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 25 May 2025 .

Organ that smells and facilitates breathing For other uses, see Nose (disambiguation) .

This article is about noses in general. For the article about noses in humans, see Human nose .

Nose Nose of a dog Details Identifiers Latin nasus MeSH D009666 TA98 A06.1.01.001 A01.1.00.009 TA2 117 Anatomical terminology [ edit on Wikidata ] A nose is a sensory organ and respiratory structure in vertebrates . It consists of a nasal cavity inside the head, and an external nose on the face. The external nose houses the nostrils , or nares, a pair of tubes providing airflow through the nose for respiration . Where the nostrils pass through the nasal cavity they widen, are known as nasal fossae, and contain turbinates and olfactory mucosa . The nasal cavity also connects to the paranasal sinuses (dead-end air cavities for pressure buffering and humidification). From the nasal cavity, the nostrils continue into the pharynx , a switch track valve connecting the respiratory and digestive systems .

In humans, the nose is located centrally on the face and serves as an alternative respiratory passage especially during suckling for infants .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] The protruding nose that is completely separate from the mouth part is a characteristic found only in therian mammals . It has been theorized that this unique mammalian nose evolved from the anterior part of the upper jaw of the reptilian-like ancestors ( synapsids ).

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Air treatment [ edit ] 3D medical animation still shot depicting a human nose Acting as the first interface between the external environment and an animal's delicate internal lungs, a nose conditions incoming air, both as a function of thermal regulation and filtration during respiration, as well as enabling the sensory perception of smell.

[ 6 ] Hair inside nostrils filter incoming air, as a first line of defense against dust particles, smoke, and other potential obstructions that would otherwise inhibit respiration, and as a kind of filter against airborne illness. In addition to acting as a filter, mucus produced within the nose supplements the body's effort to maintain temperature, as well as contributes moisture to integral components of the respiratory system. Capillary structures of the nose warm and humidify air entering the body; later, this role in retaining moisture enables conditions for alveoli to properly exchange O 2 for CO 2 (i.e., respiration) within the lungs. During exhalation, the capillaries then aid recovery of some moisture, mostly as a function of thermal regulation, again.

[ 7 ] Sense of direction [ edit ] The wet nose of dogs is useful for the perception of direction. The sensitive cold receptors in the skin detect the place where the nose is cooled the most and this is the direction a particular smell that the animal just picked up comes from.

[ 8 ] Structure in air-breathing forms [ edit ] The nose of a tapir In amphibians and lungfish , the nostrils open into small sacs that, in turn, open into the forward roof of the mouth through the choanae . These sacs contain a small amount of olfactory epithelium, which, in the case of caecilians , also lines a number of neighbouring tentacles. Despite the general similarity in structure to those of amphibians, the nostrils of lungfish are not used in respiration, since these animals breathe through their mouths. Amphibians also have a vomeronasal organ , lined by olfactory epithelium, but, unlike those of amniotes , this is generally a simple sac that, except in salamanders , has little connection with the rest of the nasal system.

[ 9 ] In reptiles , the nasal chamber is generally larger, with the choanae located much further back in the roof of the mouth. In crocodilians , the chamber is exceptionally long, helping the animal to breathe while partially submerged. The reptilian nasal chamber is divided into three parts: an anterior vestibule , the main olfactory chamber, and a posterior nasopharynx . The olfactory chamber is lined by olfactory epithelium on its upper surface and possesses a number of turbinates to increase the sensory area. The vomeronasal organ is well-developed in lizards and snakes, in which it no longer connects with the nasal cavity, opening directly into the roof of the mouth. It is smaller in turtles, in which it retains its original nasal connection, and is absent in adult crocodilians.

[ 9 ] Birds have a similar nose to reptiles, with the nostrils located at the upper rear part of the beak . Since they generally have a poor sense of smell, the olfactory chamber is small, although it does contain three turbinates, which sometimes have a complex structure similar to that of mammals . In many birds, including doves and fowls , the nostrils are covered by a horny protective shield. The vomeronasal organ of birds is either under-developed or altogether absent, depending on the species.

[ 9 ] Elephants have prehensile noses.

The nasal cavities in mammals are both fused into one. Among most species, they are exceptionally large, typically occupying up to half the length of the skull. In some groups, however, including primates , bats , and cetaceans , the nose has been secondarily reduced, and these animals consequently have a relatively poor sense of smell. The nasal cavity of mammals has been enlarged, in part, by the development of a palate cutting off the entire upper surface of the original oral cavity , which consequently becomes part of the nose, leaving the palate as the new roof of the mouth. The enlarged nasal cavity contains complex turbinates forming coiled scroll-like shapes that help to warm the air before it reaches the lungs. The cavity also extends into neighbouring skull bones, forming additional air cavities known as paranasal sinuses .

[ 9 ] In cetaceans , the nose has been reduced to one or two blowholes , which are the nostrils that have migrated to the top of the head. This adaptation gave cetaceans a more streamlined body shape and the ability to breathe while mostly submerged. Conversely, the elephant 's nose has elaborated into a long, muscular, manipulative organ called the trunk .

The vomeronasal organ of mammals is generally similar to that of reptiles. In most species, it is located in the floor of the nasal cavity, and opens into the mouth via two nasopalatine ducts running through the palate, but it opens directly into the nose in many rodents . It is, however, lost in bats, and in many primates, including humans.

[ 9 ] In fish [ edit ] Fish have a relatively good sense of smell.

[ 10 ] Unlike that of tetrapods , the nose has no connection with the mouth, nor any role in respiration. Instead, it generally consists of a pair of small pouches located behind the nostrils at the front or sides of the head. In many cases, each of the nostrils is divided into two by a fold of skin, allowing water to flow into the nose through one side and out through the other.

[ 9 ] The pouches are lined by olfactory epithelium, and commonly include a series of internal folds to increase the surface area, often forming an elaborate "olfactory rosette". In some teleosts , the pouches branch off into additional sinus-like cavities, while in coelacanths , they form a series of tubes.

[ 9 ] In the earliest vertebrates, there was only one nostril and olfactory pouch, and the nasal passage was connected to the hypophysis . The same anatomy is observed in the most primitive living vertebrates, the lampreys and hagfish . In gnathostome ancestors, the olfactory apparatus gradually became paired (presumably to allow sense of direction of smells), and freeing the midline from the nasal passage allowed evolution of jaws.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Nasal bridge Obligate nasal breathing Rhinarium , the wet, naked surface around the nostrils in most mammals, absent in haplorrhine primates such as humans References [ edit ] ^ "7.2 the Skull" .

Anatomy and Physiology - The Skull . OpenStax. 2020-04-05.

^ "22.1 Organs and Structures of the Respiratory System" .

Anatomy and Physiology - Organs and Structures of the Respiratory System . OpenStax. 2020-04-05.

^ Bahr, Diane (2010-05-15).

Nobody Ever Told Me (Or My Mother) That!

. Sensory World. p. 10.

ISBN 9781935567202 .

^ Higashiyama, Hiroki; Koyabu, Daisuke; Hirasawa, Tatsuya; Werneburg, Ingmar; Kuratani, Shigeru; Kurihara, Hiroki (November 2, 2021).

"Mammalian face as an evolutionary novelty" .

PNAS .

118 (44): e2111876118.

Bibcode : 2021PNAS..11811876H .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.2111876118 .

PMC 8673075 .

PMID 34716275 .

S2CID 240228857 .

^ "Mammals' noses come from reptiles' jaws: Evolutionary development of facial bones" .

Phys.org . November 1, 2021.

^ "Your Nose, the Guardian of Your Lungs" .

Boston Medical Center . Retrieved 2020-06-29 .

^ "22.1 Organs and Structures of the Respiratory System" .

Anatomy and Physiology - Organs and Structures of the Respiratory System . OpenStax. 2020-04-05.

^ Dijkgraaf, S. (1978).

Vergelijkende dierfysiologie ; Bohn: Scheltema en Holkema, ISBN 90-313-0322-4 [ page needed ] ^ a b c d e f g Romer, Alfred Sherwood; Parsons, Thomas S. (1977).

The Vertebrate Body . Philadelphia, PA: Holt-Saunders International. pp.

453– 458.

ISBN 0-03-910284-X .

^ "Will Fish Lose Their Sense of Smell in Acidic Oceans?" . 2018-08-07.

^ Janvier, Philippe (2013).

"Led by the nose" .

Nature .

493 (7431): 169– 170.

doi : 10.1038/nature11766 .

PMID 23254939 .

S2CID 205232053 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Noses .

Media related to nose at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to noses at Wikiquote Portals : Anatomy Animals Biology Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Terminologia Anatomica 2 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nose&oldid=1292096313 " Categories : Nose Human head and neck Respiratory system Olfactory system Facial features Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2020 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Commons link is locally defined This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 05:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nose 180 languages Add topic

