Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Criticism 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Business nationalism 2 languages العربية Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from National capitalism ) Right-wing populist, isolationist and protectionist ideology held by business leaders Not to be confused with Corporate nationalism .

Part of a series on Nationalism Nation forming Nationalism in Antiquity Nationalism in the Middle Ages Anthem Church Colours Emblem Father Flag Epic God Identity Persona Language Myth Sport State Symbol Treasure Animal Core values Allegiance Independence Patriotism Self-determination Solidarity Types Anarchist Blind Bourgeois Business Welfare Civic Communist Constitutional patriotism Corporate Cyber- Ecological Economic Ethnic Ethnopluralism Expansionist Homosexual Indigenism Integral Left-wing ( populism ) Musical Mystic Neo- Pan- Racial Religious Clerical Resource Revolutionary National syndicalist National Bolshevik Fascism Nazism Ethnocacerism Romantic Technological Territorial Trans- Ultra- Organizations List of nationalist organizations Related concepts Anationalism Anti-nationalism Anti-globalization movement Anti-imperialism Banal nationalism Civil religion Communitarianism Cosmopolitanism Cultural nationalism Diaspora politics Ethnocentrism Francoism Gastronationalism Gender and nationalism Globalism Historiography and nationalism Imagined community Imperialism Internationalism Irredentism Jingoism Localism Militarism National indifference Nationalism studies Nativism Plurinationalism Post- Racism Revanchism Right-wing populism Seasonal or cultural festival Subsidiarity in Catholicism Trumpism Xenophobia Politics portal v t e This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Business nationalism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia .

See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.

( January 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Business nationalism is an economic nationalist ideology held by a sector of the political right in the United States.

[ 1 ] Business nationalists are conservative business and industrial leaders who favor a protectionist trade policy and an isolationist foreign policy.  Locked in a power struggle with corporate international interests , business nationalists often use populist rhetoric and anti-elitist rhetoric to build a broader base of support in the middle class and working class .

[ 1 ] In the past, business nationalism has also been the main sector in the US from which radical anti-communism and union busting has emerged. There have also been sectors of business nationalism, particularly the leadership of the Nazi Party in Germany, and Fascism in general, that have promoted the Red Scares , nativism , and allegations of Jewish banking conspiracies .

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Ultraconservative business and industrial leaders who felt that the New Deal implemented in the United States between 1933 and 1936 was proof of a sinister alliance by international finance capital and communist -controlled labor unions to destroy free enterprise became known as "business nationalists".

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] In the middle of the 1930s, Gerald L. K. Smith carried the banner for business nationalists, many of them isolationists who would later oppose the entry of the United States into World War II . Smith received public and financial support from wealthy businessmen who were concentrated in "nationalist-oriented industries".

These included the heads of national oil companies Quaker State , Pennzoil , and Kendall Refining ; automakers Henry Ford , John Francis Dodge , and Horace Elgin Dodge . Business nationalists who networked with other ultra-conservatives included J. Howard Pew , president of Sun Oil , and William B. Bell, president of the chemical company American Cyanamid .

[ 4 ] Pew and Bell served on the executive committee of the National Association of Manufacturers . Pew also funded the American Liberty League (1934–1940), Sentinels of the Republic , and other groups that flirted with fascism prior to World War II. After World War II Pew funded conservative Christian evangelicals such as Reverend Billy Graham .

[ 4 ] The John Birch Society , founded in 1959, incorporated many themes from pre-World War II right-wing groups opposed to the New Deal and had its base in business nationalist circles. The society heavily disseminated an ultraconservative business nationalist critique of corporate internationalists networked through groups such as the Council on Foreign Relations .

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] As of 2007 [update] business nationalism was represented by ultraconservative political figures such as Pat Buchanan .

[ 4 ] Criticism [ edit ] According to progressive scholar Mark Rupert, the right-wing anti-globalist worldview of business nationalists "envisions a world in which Americans are uniquely privileged , inheritors of a divinely inspired socio-political order which must at all costs be defended against external intrusions and internal subversion.” Rupert argues that this reactionary analysis seeks to challenge corporate power without comprehending the nature of " capital concentration and the transnational socialization of production ." The reactionary analysis absent this understanding breeds social alienation and intensifies " scapegoating and hostility toward those seen as outside of, different or dissenting from its vision of national identity." As alienation builds, more overtly fascistic forces will attempt to pull some of these angry people into an ideological framework that further justifies the demonization of the chosen " Other ." [ 1 ] Investigative reporter Chip Berlet argues: When populist consumer groups, such as those led by Ralph Nader , forge uncritical alliances with business nationalists to rally against GATT and NAFTA , an opportunity emerges for the anti-elite rhetoric of right-wing populism to piggyback onto a legitimate progressive critique. Why is this a problem? Business nationalism carries with it its right-wing baggage.

Pat Buchanan ’s rhetoric is an example of this baggage. His racist, antisemitic and xenophobic inclinations reflect business nationalism's right-wing national chauvinism. At the core of the right wing, populism is the " producerist narrative" where the main scapegoats are people of color, especially Blacks. This narrative diverts attention from the White supremacist subtext. It uses coded language to mobilize resentment against people of color through attacks on issues immediately relevant to them, such as welfare, immigration, tax, or education policies. Women, gay men and lesbians, abortion providers, youth, students, and environmentalists are also frequently scapegoated in this manner.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Alt-right Anti-globalization movement Business Plot Corporate nationalism Economic nationalism Isolationism Nativism (politics) Paleoconservatism Producerism Protectionism Right-wing populism References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Berlet Chip ; Lyons, Matthew N. (2000).

Right-Wing Populism in America: Too Close for Comfort . Guilford Press.

ISBN 1-57230-562-2 .

^ Berlet, Chip (2007). "The New Political Right in the United States: Reaction, Rollback, and Resentment". In Thompson, Michael (ed.).

Confronting the New Conservatism: The Rise of the Right in America . New York: NYU Press. p. 75.

ISBN 9780814783290 . Retrieved 2016-08-27 .

Ultraconservative business and industrial leaders 'saw the New Deal as proof of a sinister alliance between international finance capital and communist-controlled working-class organisations to destroy free enterprise.' [...] This sector of the U.S. political Right became known as 'business nationalists[...]' [...].

^ Huntington 2021 , p. 4.

^ a b c Thompson, Michael (2007).

Confronting the New Conservatism: The Rise of the Right in America . NYU Press.

ISBN 978-0-8147-8299-6 .

^ Berlet, Chip (2000).

"John Birch Society" . Retrieved 6 October 2010 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) Bibliography [ edit ] Huntington, John S. (2021).

Far-right Vanguard: The Radical Roots of Modern Conservatism . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press . p. 136.

ISBN 9780812253474 .

v t e Nationalism Development Nationalism in Antiquity Nationalism in the Middle Ages Anthem Colours Flag Epic God Identity Language Music Myth Religion Sport Symbol Animal Emblem Flower Treasure By type African Anarchist Blind Bourgeois Business Welfare Civic Constitutional patriotism Corporate- Cyber- Ecological Economic Ethnic European Expansionist Palingenetic ultranationalism Homo- Integral Left-wing Communist Linguistic Mystic Neo-/New Pan- Queer Right-wing Racial Arab Berber Black Korean White Zionism Religious Christian Catholic Clerico- Mormon Hindu Hindutva Islamic Resource Revolutionary Ethnocacerism National syndicalist Falangism Fascism List of fascist movements Romantic Technological Territorial Terrorism Trans- Ultra- Japan Organizations List of nationalist organizations Nationalist Clubs Related concepts Anarchism and nationalism Anationalism Anti-nationalism Banal nationalism Cultural nationalism Diaspora politics Eliminationism Exceptionalism Gastronationalism Gender and nationalism Historiography and nationalism Internationalism Irredentism Jingoism Nation-building National indifference National question National revival Nation state Nationalism studies Natural border Plurinationalism Principle of nationalities [ fr ] Revanchism State-building Wars of national liberation Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Business_nationalism&oldid=1278379717 " Categories : Economic ideologies Economic nationalism Nationalism in Australia Nationalism in the United States Right-wing populism in the United States Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2016 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles with style issues from January 2011 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2007 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 2 March 2025, at 03:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Business nationalism 2 languages Add topic

