Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 History 3 Notable people 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Aeolis 39 languages አማርኛ العربية Asturianu Беларуская Български Català Cymraeg Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Latina Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 39°12′N 26°42′E ﻿ / ﻿ 39.2°N 26.7°E ﻿ / 39.2; 26.7 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Area that comprised the west and northwestern region of Anatolia For the region of planet Mars, see Aeolis quadrangle .

Not to be confused with Aeolus .

Aeolis ( Αἰολίς ) Ancient region of Anatolia Ruins of the Agora of Smyrna Map of western Anatolia with Aeolis shaded Location Western Anatolia , Turkey State existed 8th-6th centuries BC (as Dodecapolis ) Language Aeolic Greek Biggest city Smyrna (modern-day İzmir , Turkey ) Roman province Asia Aeolis ( / ˈ iː ə l ɪ s / ; Ancient Greek : Αἰολίς , romanized : Aiolís ), or Aeolia ( / iː ˈ oʊ l i ə / ; Ancient Greek: Αἰολία , romanized: Aiolía ), was an area that comprised the west and northwestern region of Asia Minor (modern-day Turkey ), mostly along the coast, and also several offshore islands (particularly Lesbos ), where the Aeolian Greek city-states were located. Aeolis incorporated the southern parts of Mysia , and is bounded by it to the north, Ionia to the south, and Lydia to the east.

Geography [ edit ] Aeolis was an ancient district on the western coast of Asia Minor . It extended along the Aegean Sea from the entrance of the Hellespont (now the Dardanelles ) south to the Hermus River (now the Gediz River). It was named for the Aeolians, some of whom migrated there from Greece before 1000 BC. Aeolis was, however, an ethnological and linguistic enclave rather than a geographical unit. The district often was considered part of the larger northwest region of Mysia.

History [ edit ] Greek settlements in western Asia Minor, Aeolian area in dark red.

According to Homer's Odyssey , Odysseus , after his stay with the Cyclopes , reached the floating island of Aeolia , where Aeolus son of Hippotas provided him with the west wind Zephyrus .

[ 1 ] Aeolis, Kyme; Tetradrachm; Silver; circa 165-140 BC; Obverse: Head of the Amazon Kyme right, wearing taenia; Reverse: Horse walking right, skyphos (one handled cup) below, ΚΥΜΑΙΩΝ left, ΣΕΥΘΗΣ (magistrate) in exergue, all within laurel-wreath; 34.2mm, 16.409g; Reference: SNG Von Aulock 1640; Oakley obv. die 59; Sg4183 var By the 8th century BC the Aeolians' twelve most important cities were independent. They formed a league of twelve cities (a Dodecapolis ): Cyme (also called Phriconis), Larissa , Neonteichos , Temnos , Cilla , Notion , Aegiroessa , Pitane , Aegae , Myrina , Gryneion , and Smyrna .

[ 2 ] The most celebrated of the cities was Smyrna (modern Izmir, Turkey ), but in 699 BC, Smyrna became part of an Ionian confederacy.

[ citation needed ] This league or confederation , known as the Ionian League , also called the Panionic League , was formed at the end of the Meliac War in the mid-7th century BC.

[ 3 ] Croesus , king of Lydia (reigned 560-546 BC), conquered the remaining cities. Later they were held successively by the Persians , Macedonians , Seleucids , and Pergamenes.

[ 4 ] Attalus III , the last king of Pergamum , bequeathed Aeolis to the Roman Republic in 133 BC. Shortly afterwards it became part of the Roman province of Asia . At the partition of the Roman Empire (395 AD), Aeolis was assigned to the East Roman (Byzantine) empire and remained largely under Byzantine rule until the early 15th century, [ citation needed ] when the Ottoman Turks occupied the area.

[ 5 ] Notable people [ edit ] Autolycus of Pitane Andriscus Elias Venezis See also [ edit ] Ancient regions of Anatolia Regions of ancient Greece Notes [ edit ] ^ "Homer, The Odyssey, Scroll 10, line 1" .

Perseus Digital Library . Retrieved 2022-09-05 .

Thence we went on to the Aeolian island where lives Aeolus son of Hippotas, dear to the immortal gods. It is an island that floats (as it were) upon the sea, iron bound with a wall that girds it ^ Herodotus .

The Histories : 1.149. Compare Ionian League .

^ "Recent Finds in Archaeology: Panionion Sanctuary Discovered in Southwest Turkey" .

Athena Review .

4 (2): 10– 11. 2005. Archived from the original on 2012-03-23 . Retrieved 2018-05-30 .

^ Each of the cities minted coins of its own, using different gods, animals and objects as identifying city badges.  See asiaminorcoins.com - ancient coins of Aeolis ^ Smyrna fell to the Seljuk Turk Tzachas in 1076, to the Turkish Beylik of Aydın about 1330 and to the Turco-Mongol Timur in 1402 (after the Siege of Smyrna ).

References [ edit ] Pierluigi Bonanno, Aiolis. Storia e archeologia di una regione dell’Asia Minore alla fine del II millennio a.C.

, USA, 2006 External links [ edit ] Media related to Aeolis at Wikimedia Commons v t e Historical regions of Anatolia Aeolis Bithynia Cappadocia Caria Cilicia Doris Galatia Ionia Isauria Lycaonia Lycia Lydia Mysia Pamphylia Paphlagonia Phrygia Pisidia Pontus Troad v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Ancient kingdoms of Anatolia Bronze Age Ahhiyawa Arzawa Assuwa League Carchemish Hapalla Hatti Hayasa-Azzi Hittite Empire Hurrian States ( Isuwa , Kizzuwatna , Mitanni ) Kalašma Kaskia Kussara Lukka Luwia Miletus Mira Mysia Nairi Pala Pisidia / Sagalassos Purushanda Seha Shupria Urshu Urumu Wilusa / Troy Zalpuwa Iron Age Aeolia Caria Cimmerians Colchis Diauehi Doris Etiuni Ionia Lycia Lydia Mushki Neo-Hittites ( Atuna , Carchemish , Gurgum , Ḫilakku , Ḫiyawa , Kammanu , Kummuh , Tabal ) Phrygia Urartu Classical Age Antigonids Bithynia Cappadocia Cilicia Galatia Paphlagonia Pergamon Pontus Turkey portal 39°12′N 26°42′E ﻿ / ﻿ 39.2°N 26.7°E ﻿ / 39.2; 26.7 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aeolis&oldid=1300868323 " Categories : Aeolis States and territories established in the 8th century BC States and territories disestablished in the 6th century BC Geography of ancient Greece Asia (Roman province) Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017 Commons category link from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 20:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aeolis 39 languages Add topic

