Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure 2 Additional images 3 References 4 See also Toggle the table of contents Vestibule of the ear 16 languages العربية Bosanski Català Español Euskara Français 한국어 Lietuvių 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Central part of the bony labyrinth Vestibule of the ear Posterior canal Superior canal Utricle Horizontal canal Vestibule Cochlea Saccule Schematic overview of the vestibulocochlear organ, vestibule centre left.

Details Part of Bony labyrinth of the inner ear Identifiers Latin vestibulum labyrinthi, vestibulum auris MeSH D014722 TA98 A15.3.03.004 TA2 6942 FMA 60183 Anatomical terminology [ edit on Wikidata ] The vestibule is the central part of the bony labyrinth in the inner ear , and is situated medial to the eardrum , behind the cochlea , and in front of the three semicircular canals .

[ 1 ] The name comes from the Latin vestibulum , literally an entrance hall.

Structure [ edit ] The vestibule is somewhat oval in shape, but flattened transversely; it measures about 5 mm from front to back, the same from top to bottom, and about 3 mm across.

In its lateral or tympanic wall is the oval window , closed, in the fresh state, by the base of the stapes and annular ligament .

On its medial wall, at the forepart, is a small circular depression, the recessus sphæricus, which is perforated, at its anterior and inferior part, by several minute holes (macula cribrosa media) for the passage of filaments of the acoustic nerve to the saccule ; and behind this depression is an oblique ridge, the crista vestibuli , the anterior end of which is named the pyramid of the vestibule.

This ridge bifurcates below to enclose a small depression, the fossa cochlearis, which is perforated by a number of holes for the passage of filaments of the acoustic nerve which supply the vestibular end of the cochlear duct .

The orifice of the vestibular aqueduct is the hind part of the medial wall; it extends to the posterior surface of the petrous portion of the temporal bone .

It transmits a small vein and contains a tubular prolongation of the membranous labyrinth , the endolymphatic duct , which ends in a cul-de-sac between the layers of the dura mater within the cranial cavity.

On the upper wall or roof, there is a transversely oval depression, the recessus ellipticus, separated from the recessus sphæricus by the crista vestibuli already mentioned.

The pyramid and adjoining part of the recessus ellipticus are perforated by a number of holes (macula cribrosa superior).

The apertures in the pyramid transmit the nerves to the utricle ; those in the recessus ellipticus are the nerves to the ampullæ of the superior and lateral semicircular ducts.

Behind, the five orifices of the semicircular canals can be found.

In the frontal view, there is an elliptical opening which communicates with the vestibular duct of the cochlea.

Additional images [ edit ] Right osseous labyrinth (lateral view).

The cochlea and vestibule (view from above).

Chain of ossicles and their ligaments, seen from the front in a vertical, transverse section of the tympanum. (Vestibule visible at center right.) Internal liquid structures of the cochlea and semicircular ducts, vestibule at centre.

References [ edit ] This article incorporates text in the public domain from page 1047 of the 20th edition of Gray's Anatomy (1918) ^ Treuting, Piper M.; Dintzis, Suzanne M.; Sellers, Rani (2018). "Special Senses".

Comparative Anatomy and Histology . Elsevier. pp.

471– 485.

doi : 10.1016/b978-0-12-802900-8.00022-1 .

ISBN 978-0-12-802900-8 .

The vestibule sits between and connects the cochlea and semicircular canals and helps to maintain equilibrium.

See also [ edit ] Vestibular system v t e Anatomy of hearing and balance Outer ear Auricle helix antihelix tragus antitragus intertragic notch earlobe Ear canal Auricular muscles Eardrum umbo pars flaccida Middle ear Tympanic cavity Medial structures oval window round window secondary tympanic membrane prominence of facial canal promontory of tympanic cavity Posterior structures mastoid cells aditus to mastoid antrum pyramidal eminence Ossicles Malleus superior ligament lateral ligament anterior ligament Incus superior ligament posterior ligament Stapes annular ligament Muscles stapedius tensor tympani Auditory tube / Eustachian tube Torus tubarius Inner ear Labyrinths membranous bony Auditory system General Cochlea Vestibular duct Helicotrema Tympanic duct Modiolus Cochlear cupula Perilymphatic space Perilymph Cochlear aqueduct Cells Claudius Boettcher Cochlear duct / scala media Reissner's/vestibular membrane Basilar membrane Reticular membrane Endolymph Stria vascularis Spiral ligament Organ of Corti stereocilia tip links Tectorial membrane Sulcus spiralis externus internus Spiral limbus Vestibular system Vestibule Utricle macula Saccule macula Kinocilium Otolith Otolithic membrane Vestibular aqueduct endolymphatic duct endolymphatic sac Ductus reuniens Semicircular canals Superior Posterior Horizontal Ampullary cupula Ampullae crista ampullaris Authority control databases National Japan Other Terminologia Anatomica Portal : Anatomy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vestibule_of_the_ear&oldid=1196474055 " Categories : Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 20th edition of Gray's Anatomy (1918) Ear Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 17 January 2024, at 16:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vestibule of the ear 16 languages Add topic

