Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summary Toggle Summary subsection 1.1 Dependent territories 1.2 Similar entities 2 Lists of dependent territories Toggle Lists of dependent territories subsection 2.1 New Zealand 2.2 Norway 2.3 United Kingdom 2.4 United States 3 Lists of similar entities Toggle Lists of similar entities subsection 3.1 Australia 3.2 China 3.3 Denmark 3.4 Finland 3.5 France 3.6 Netherlands 3.7 Norway 4 Description 5 Overview of inhabited dependent territories 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Citations 8.2 Sources 9 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Dependent territory 75 languages Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Limburgs Македонски მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол Nederlands नेपाली Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Scots Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Sunda Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Territory that does not possess full political independence as a sovereign state This article is about external territories which have a greater degree of autonomy from their parent state and function as de facto independent political entities. For subnational administrative divisions which have some degree of autonomy under the national government, see Autonomous administrative division .

Part of the Politics series Basic forms of government List of forms · List of countries Source of power Democracy ( rule by many ) Demarchy Direct Economic Liberal Representative Social Socialist Others Oligarchy (rule by few) Anocracy Aristocracy Broligarchy Gerontocracy Kleptocracy Kritarchy Meritocracy Noocracy Particracy Plutocracy Stratocracy Technocracy Theocracy Autocracy ( rule by one ) Despotism Dictatorship Military dictatorship Tyranny Anarchy (rule by none) Anarchism Free association Stateless Power ideology Monarchy Republic (socio-political ideologies) Absolute Communist Constitutional Directorial Legalist Parliamentary Presidential Semi-presidential Authoritarian Libertarian (socio-economic ideologies) Anarchism Colonialism Communism Despotism Distributism Fascism Feudalism Islamism Socialism Totalitarianism Tribalism Religious Secular State religion Secular state Separation of church and state State atheism Global Local (geo-cultural ideologies) City-state Intergovernmental organisation National government World government Nationalism Internationalism Globalism Power structure Unitarism Unitary state Empire Principality Client state Associated state Dependent territory Dominion Protectorate Puppet state Puppet monarch Satellite state Self-governing colony Tributary state Buffer state Vassal state Viceroyalty Federalism Confederation Devolution Federation Superstate Supranational union International relations Small power Middle power Regional power Emerging power Great power Superpower Related Administrative division Democracy indices Democratic transition Autocratization Democratisation Hybrid regimes Politics portal v t e A dependent territory , dependent area , or dependency (sometimes referred as an external territory ) is a territory that does not possess full political independence or sovereignty as a sovereign state and remains politically outside the controlling state's integral area.

A dependent territory is commonly distinguished from a country subdivision by being considered not to be a constituent part of a sovereign state. An administrative subdivision, instead, is understood to be a division of a state proper. A dependent territory, conversely, often maintains a great degree of autonomy from its controlling state. Historically, most colonies were considered to be dependent territories. Not all autonomous entities are considered to be dependent territories.

[ 1 ] [ failed verification ] Most inhabited, dependent territories have their own ISO 3166 country codes.

Some political entities inhabit a special position guaranteed by an international treaty or another agreement, thereby creating a certain level of autonomy (e.g. a difference in immigration rules). Those entities are sometimes considered to be, or are at least grouped with, dependent territories, [ 2 ] but are officially considered by their governing states to be an integral part of those states.

[ 2 ] Such an example is Åland , an autonomous region of Finland .

Summary [ edit ] The lists below include the following: Dependent territories [ edit ] Greenland, an autonomous territory of Denmark in North America Two states in free association, one dependent territory, and one Antarctic claim in the listing for New Zealand One uninhabited territory and two Antarctic claims in the listing for Norway 13 overseas territories (ten autonomous, two used primarily as military bases, and one uninhabited), three Crown dependencies, and one Antarctic claim in the listing for the United Kingdom 13 unincorporated territories (five inhabited and eight uninhabited) and two claimed but uncontrolled territories in the listing for the United States Similar entities [ edit ] Six external territories (three inhabited and three uninhabited) and one Antarctic claim in the listing for Australia Two special administrative regions in the listing for China Two self-governing territories with autonomy in internal affairs in the listing for Denmark One autonomous region governed according to an act and international treaties in the listing for Finland Five autonomous overseas collectivities, one sui generis collectivity, and two uninhabited overseas territories (one of which includes an Antarctic claim) in the listing for France Three constituent countries with autonomy in internal affairs in the listing for the Netherlands One internal territory with limited sovereignty in the listing for Norway Aruba , a Dependent territory of the Netherlands in the Caribbean Dependent territories and their sovereign states. All territories are labeled according to ISO 3166-1 [ note 1 ] or with numbers.

[ note 2 ] Coloured areas without labels are integral parts of their respective countries.

Antarctica is shown as a condominium instead of individual claims .

Lists of dependent territories [ edit ] This list includes all territories that have not been legally incorporated into their governing state, including several territories that are not on the list of non-self-governing territories of the General Assembly of the United Nations .

[ 3 ] All claims in Antarctica are listed in italics .

New Zealand [ edit ] Main article: Realm of New Zealand New Zealand has two self-governing associated states , one dependent territory, and a territorial claim in Antarctica.

[ 4 ] [ better source needed ] Associated state Administration ISO 3166 country code Cook Islands Self-governing state in free association with New Zealand since 1965. Cook Islands' status is considered to be equivalent to independence for international law purposes, and the country exercises full sovereignty over its internal and external affairs.

[ 5 ] Under the terms of the free association agreement, however, New Zealand retains some responsibility for the foreign relations and defence of the Cook Islands. These responsibilities confer no rights of control and are exercised only at the request of the Cook Islands Government. The government of New Zealand does not consider it appropriate for the Cook Islands to have a separate seat at the United Nations, due to its continued use of the right of Cook Islanders to have New Zealand citizenship .

[ 6 ] CK Niue Self-governing state in free association with New Zealand since 1974. Niue's status is considered to be equivalent to independence for international law purposes, and the country exercises full sovereignty over its internal and external affairs.

[ 5 ] Under the terms of the free association agreement, however, New Zealand retains some responsibility for the foreign relations and defence of Niue. These responsibilities confer no rights of control and are exercised only at the request of the Government of Niue. The government of New Zealand does not consider it appropriate for Niue to have a separate seat at the United Nations, due to its continued use of the right of Niueans to have New Zealand citizenship .

[ 6 ] NU Dependent territory Administration ISO 3166 country code Tokelau Territory of New Zealand. A UN-sponsored referendum on self-governance in February 2006 did not produce the two-thirds supermajority necessary for changing the current political status. Another one was in October 2007 , which failed to reach the two-thirds margin.

[ 7 ] Appears on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories .

TK Dependent territory (uninhabited, claimed) Administration ISO 3166 country code Ross Dependency This is New Zealand's Antarctic claim . Unlike Tokelau and the associated states (Cook Islands and Niue), the Ross Dependency is, according to the New Zealand government, constitutionally part of New Zealand.

[ 8 ] No unique ISO 3166 country codes Norway [ edit ] Main article: Dependencies of Norway Norway has one dependent territory and two Antarctic claims. Norway also possesses the inhabited islands of Svalbard where Norwegian sovereignty is limited ( see below ).

Dependent territory (uninhabited) Administration ISO 3166 country code Bouvet Island Dependency administered from Oslo by the Polar Affairs Department of the Ministry of Justice and the Police .

BV Dependent territory (uninhabited, claimed) Administration ISO 3166 country code Peter I Island Dependencies (subject to the Antarctic Treaty System ) administered from Oslo by the Polar Affairs Department of the Ministry of Justice and the Police .

No unique ISO 3166 country codes Queen Maud Land United Kingdom [ edit ] Main articles: British Overseas Territories and Crown Dependencies The United Kingdom has three " Crown Dependencies ", thirteen "Overseas Territories" (ten autonomous, two used primarily as military bases, and one uninhabited), and one Antarctic claim.

Crown Dependency Administration ISO 3166 country code Guernsey Responsibility for defence, international representation, and good government rests with the United Kingdom.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] GG Isle of Man IM Jersey JE Overseas Territory Administration ISO 3166 country code Anguilla House of Assembly of Anguilla handles domestic affairs. Appears on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories .

AI Bermuda Parliament of Bermuda handles domestic affairs and the territory is defined by the U.K. as self-governing. Appears on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories .

BM British Virgin Islands House of Assembly of the British Virgin Islands handles domestic affairs. Appears on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories VG Cayman Islands Parliament of the Cayman Islands handles domestic affairs. Almost complete internal self-government. Appears on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories .

KY Falkland Islands Legislative Assembly of the Falkland Islands handles domestic affairs. Appears on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories .

FK Gibraltar Gibraltar Parliament handles domestic affairs. Almost complete internal self-government. Appears on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories .

GI Montserrat Legislative Council of Montserrat handles domestic affairs. Appears on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories .

MS Pitcairn Islands Island Council of the Pitcairn Islands handles some domestic affairs, however decisions are subject to approval by the Governor of the Pitcairn Islands , reporting to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office . Appears on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories .

PN Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Legislative Council of Saint Helena , Ascension Island Council and Tristan da Cunha Island Council handle domestic affairs. Appears on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories .

SH Turks and Caicos Islands House of Assembly of the Turks and Caicos Islands handles some domestic affairs. Appears on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories .

TC Overseas Territory (Sovereign Base Areas) Administration ISO 3166 country code Akrotiri and Dhekelia Two sovereign base areas administered as a single British overseas territory by the Commander of British Forces Cyprus , reporting to the Ministry of Defence . Permanent Cypriot population, as well as British military personnel and their families.

No unique ISO 3166 country codes Overseas Territory (uninhabited) Administration ISO 3166 country code British Indian Ocean Territory Administered by the Commissioner for the British Indian Ocean Territory , reporting to the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office . The Indigenous Chagossian population was removed between 1967 and 1973. Presently the territory is restricted to military personnel, principally at the joint U.K.-U.S. naval base on the atoll of Diego Garcia . Per a 2025 agreement, the territory is set to be ceded to Mauritius in the near future.

[ 12 ] IO South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Administered by the Commissioner for South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands (who is also the Governor of the Falkland Islands ), reporting to the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office .

GS Overseas Territory (uninhabited, claimed) Administration ISO 3166 country code British Antarctic Territory Administered by the Commissioner for the British Antarctic Territory , reporting to the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office . The UK's Antarctic claim .

No unique ISO 3166 country codes United States [ edit ] Main article: Territories of the United States Further information: Insular area and United States Minor Outlying Islands The United States has 13 " unincorporated " dependent territories under its administration and two claimed territories outside its control.

[ 13 ] The uninhabited Palmyra Atoll is administered similarly to some of these territories, and is usually included on lists of U.S. overseas territories, but it is excluded from this list because it is classified in U.S. law as an incorporated territory.

[ 14 ] The U.S. Constitution does not apply in full to the insular areas.

[ 15 ] Unincorporated organized territory Administration ISO 3166 country code Guam Unincorporated organized territory of the U.S.; policy relations conducted through the Office of Insular Affairs of the Department of the Interior . Appears on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories GU or US-GU Northern Mariana Islands Unincorporated organized territory of the U.S. with Commonwealth status; federal funding administered by the Office of Insular Affairs of the Department of the Interior MP or US-MP Puerto Rico Unincorporated organized territory of the U.S. with Commonwealth status; local government and residents are under the jurisdiction of the Federal Government of the United States PR or US-PR U.S. Virgin Islands Unincorporated organized territory of the U.S. Policy relations conducted by the Office of Insular Affairs of the Department of the Interior. Appears on the Department of the Interior VI or US-VI Unincorporated unorganized territory Administration ISO 3166 country code American Samoa Unincorporated unorganized territory administered by the Office of Insular Affairs of the Department of the Interior. Appears on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories AS or US-AS Unincorporated unorganized territory (uninhabited) [ note 3 ] Administration ISO 3166 country code Baker Island Unincorporated unorganized territories of the U.S. administered by the Fish and Wildlife Service of the Department of the Interior UM-81 Howland Island UM-84 Jarvis Island UM-86 Johnston Atoll UM-67 Kingman Reef UM-89 Midway Atoll UM-71 Navassa Island Unincorporated unorganized territory of the U.S. administered by the Fish and Wildlife Service of the Department of the Interior from the Cabo Rojo National Wildlife Refuge in Cabo Rojo , Puerto Rico UM-76 Wake Island Unincorporated unorganized territory of the U.S. administered by the U.S. Air Force under an agreement with the Department of the Interior UM-79 Unincorporated unorganized territory (uninhabited, claimed) Administration ISO 3166 country code Bajo Nuevo Bank Administered by Colombia . Claimed by the United States (under the Guano Islands Act) and Jamaica . A claim by Nicaragua was resolved in 2012 in favor of Colombia by the International Court of Justice , although the U.S. was not a party to that case and does not recognize the court's compulsory jurisdiction.

[ 16 ] Serranilla Bank Administered by Colombia ; site of a naval garrison. Claimed by the United States (since 1879 under the Guano Islands Act) and Jamaica . A claim by Nicaragua was resolved in 2012 in favor of Colombia by the International Court of Justice, although the United States was not a party to that case and does not recognize the court's compulsory jurisdiction.

[ 16 ] A claim by Honduras was settled in a 1986 treaty over maritime boundaries with Colombia.

[ 17 ] Lists of similar entities [ edit ] The following entities are, according to the law of their state, integral parts of the state but exhibit many characteristics of dependent territories. This list is generally limited to entities that are either subject to an international treaty on their status, uninhabited, or have a unique level of autonomy and are largely self-governing in matters other than international affairs. It generally does not include entities with no unique autonomy, such as the five overseas departments and regions ( French Guiana , Guadeloupe , Martinique , Mayotte , and Réunion ) of France; the BES islands ( Bonaire , Sint Eustatius , and Saba ) of the Netherlands; Jan Mayen of Norway; and Palmyra Atoll of the United States.

Entities with only limited unique autonomy, such as Barbuda of Antigua and Barbuda; Sabah and Sarawak of Malaysia; the two autonomous regions (the Azores and Madeira ) of Portugal; Nevis of Saint Kitts and Nevis; the Canary Islands and the two autonomous cities ( Ceuta and Melilla ) of Spain; Northern Ireland of the United Kingdom; and entities with non-recognized unique autonomy, such as Kurdistan of Iraq; Wa of Myanmar; Gaza of Palestine; Puntland of Somalia; Rojava of Syria; and Zanzibar of Tanzania are also not included. All claims in Antarctica are listed in italics .

Australia [ edit ] Main article: States and territories of Australia § External territories Australia has six external territories in its administration and one Antarctic claim.

Debate remains as to whether the external territories are integral parts of Australia, [ citation needed ] due to their not being part of Australia in 1901, when its constituent states federated (with the exception of the Coral Sea Islands , which was a part of Queensland ).

[ 18 ] Norfolk Island was self-governing from 1979 to 2016.

[ 19 ] The external territories are often grouped separately from Australia proper for statistical purposes.

[ citation needed ] External territory Administration ISO 3166 country code Christmas Island Administered from Canberra by the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications and the Arts [ 20 ] CX Cocos (Keeling) Islands CC Norfolk Island NF External territory (uninhabited) Administration ISO 3166 country code Ashmore and Cartier Islands Administered from Canberra by the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications and the Arts [ 20 ] No unique ISO 3166 country codes Coral Sea Islands [ note 4 ] Heard Island and McDonald Islands Administered from Canberra by the Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment [ 20 ] HM External territory (uninhabited, claimed) Administration ISO 3166 country code Australian Antarctic Territory Administered from Canberra by the Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment [ 20 ] No unique ISO 3166 country codes China [ edit ] Main article: Special administrative regions of China The People's Republic of China (PRC) has two special administrative regions (SARs) that are governed according to the constitution and respective basic laws. The SARs greatly differ from Mainland China in administrative, economic, legislative, and judicial terms including by currency, left-hand versus right-hand traffic , official languages, and immigration control. Although the PRC does claim sovereignty over Taiwan (governed by the Republic of China ), it is not listed here as the PRC government does not have de facto control of the territory.

Special administrative region Administration ISO 3166 country code Hong Kong Former British colony . Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China since 1997 according to the Sino-British Joint Declaration , an international treaty registered with the United Nations . The Hong Kong Basic Law purports to provide for the territory to enjoy a "high degree" of autonomy per the " one country, two systems " model under the central government of China . Although the territory is not part of mainland China, it is officially considered an integral part of the People's Republic of China.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] HK or CN-HK Macau Former Portuguese colony . Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China since 1999 according to the Sino-Portuguese Joint Declaration , an international treaty registered with the United Nations. The Macao Basic Law provides for the territory to enjoy a high degree of autonomy per the "one country, two systems" model under the central government of China. Although the territory is not part of mainland China, it is officially considered an integral part of the People's Republic of China.

MO or CN-MO Denmark [ edit ] Main article: Danish Realm The Kingdom of Denmark contains two autonomous territories with their own governments and legislatures, and input into foreign affairs.

[ 24 ] Autonomous territory Administration ISO 3166 country code Faroe Islands Autonomous since 1948.

[ 24 ] A constituent part of the Kingdom of Denmark, but not of the European Union . Although it is not part of metropolitan Denmark , it is officially considered an integral part of the Kingdom of Denmark .

FO Greenland Autonomous since 1979.

[ 24 ] A constituent part of the Kingdom of Denmark, but withdrew from the European Economic Community in 1985. Although it is not part of metropolitan Denmark , it is officially considered an integral part of the Kingdom of Denmark .

GL Finland [ edit ] Main article: Regions of Finland Further information: Administrative divisions of Finland and Åland Islands dispute See also: Special territories of members of the European Economic Area § Åland Finland has one autonomous region that is also subject to international treaties.

Autonomous region Administration ISO 3166 country code Åland Åland is governed according to the Act on the Autonomy of Åland and international treaties. These laws guarantee the islands' autonomy in Finland, which has ultimate sovereignty over them, as well as a demilitarised status.

AX or FI-01 France [ edit ] Main article: Overseas France Further information: Overseas collectivity and Overseas territory (France) See also: Overseas country of France France has overseas six autonomous collectivities and two uninhabited territories (one of which includes an Antarctic claim). This does not include its "standard" overseas regions (which are also overseas departments ) of French Guiana , Guadeloupe , Martinique , Mayotte , and Réunion . Although also located overseas, they have the same status as the regions of metropolitan France . Nonetheless, all of France's overseas territory is considered an integral part of the French Republic .

Overseas collectivity Administration ISO 3166 country code French Polynesia Overseas collectivity since 2003; overseas country since 2004. Appears on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories PF or FR-PF Saint Barthélemy Seceded from Guadeloupe to become an overseas collectivity in 2007 BL or FR-BL Saint Martin Seceded from Guadeloupe to become an overseas collectivity in 2007. It is the only overseas collectivity that is fully part of the European Union.

MF or FR-MF Saint Pierre and Miquelon Territorial collectivity since 1985. Overseas collectivity since 2003 PM or FR-PM Wallis and Futuna Overseas territory since 1961. Overseas collectivity since 2003 WF or FR-WF Sui generis collectivity Administration ISO 3166 country code New Caledonia " Sui generis " collectivity [ 25 ] since 1998.

[ 26 ] Appears on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories NC or FR-NC Overseas state private property (uninhabited) Administration ISO 3166 country code Clipperton Island The island is administered under the direct authority of the French government [ 27 ] by the French Minister of the Overseas .

FR-CP Overseas territory (uninhabited) Administration ISO 3166 country code French Southern and Antarctic Lands TAAF ( Terres australes et antartiques françaises ) is an overseas territory since 1955, administered from Paris by an Administrateur Supérieur . The territory includes the Antarctic claim of Adélie Land [ 28 ] and several islands in the Indian Ocean , including Crozet Islands , Kerguelen Islands , Saint Paul and Amsterdam Islands and Scattered Islands TF or FR-TF [ note 5 ] Netherlands [ edit ] Main article: Kingdom of the Netherlands Further information: Dutch Caribbean The Kingdom of the Netherlands comprises three autonomous "constituent countries" in the Caribbean (listed below) and one constituent country, the Netherlands , with most of its area in Europe but also encompassing three overseas Caribbean municipalities — Bonaire , Sint Eustatius , and Saba (these three Caribbean municipalities are excluded here because they are directly administered by the Government of the Netherlands [ 30 ] ). All citizens of the Dutch Kingdom share the same nationality and are thus citizens of the European Union , but only the European portion of the Kingdom is a part of the territory of the Union, the Customs Union , and the Eurozone while other areas have overseas countries and territory status.

Constituent country Administration ISO 3166 country code Aruba Defined as a "country" (" land ") within the Kingdom by the Statute of the Kingdom of the Netherlands , Aruba obtained full autonomy in internal affairs upon separation from the Netherlands Antilles in 1986. Part of the Kingdom but not in Europe, its citizenship nonetheless includes status as citizens of the European Union (the Kingdom government coincides almost exactly with the Government of the Netherlands , and is responsible for defence, foreign affairs, and nationality law).

AW or NL-AW Curaçao Defined as a "country" (" land ") within the Kingdom by the Statute of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Curaçao and Sint Maarten were part of the Netherlands Antilles until it was dissolved in October 2010. Part of the Kingdom but not in Europe, their citizenship nonetheless includes status as citizens of the European Union (the Kingdom government coincides almost exactly with the Government of the Netherlands, and is responsible for defence, foreign affairs, and nationality law).

CW or NL-CW Sint Maarten SX or NL-SX Norway [ edit ] Main article: List of possessions of Norway Further information: Svalbard and Jan Mayen Norway has, in the Arctic, one inhabited archipelago with restrictions placed on Norwegian sovereignty — Svalbard .

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Unlike the country's dependent territory ( Bouvet Island ) and Antarctic claims ( see above ), Svalbard is a part of the Kingdom of Norway.

[ 33 ] Norway also has one uninhabited remote archipelago located in the Arctic, Jan Mayen , but it is excluded in this list as the island is directly administered by the Nordland County Municipality and none of the considerations established for Svalbard Treaty are attributed to it.

Territory Administration ISO 3166 country code Svalbard This Arctic archipelago is the northernmost permanent civilian settlement in the world. Not incorporated into any county, it is administered by a governor appointed by the Norwegian government. Since 2002, its main settlement of Longyearbyen has elected a local government . Other settlements include the Russian mining community of Barentsburg , the research station of Ny-Ålesund , and the mining outpost of Sveagruva . The Svalbard Treaty of 1920 recognises Norwegian sovereignty (administered since 1925 as a sovereign part of the Kingdom of Norway) but established Svalbard as a free economic zone [ 31 ] and a demilitarised zone .

SJ or NO-21 Description [ edit ] Bora Bora Island, French Polynesia Diego Garcia Island, British Indian Ocean Territory Three Crown Dependencies are in a form of association with the United Kingdom. They are independently administrated jurisdictions, although the British Government is solely responsible for defence and international representation and has ultimate responsibility for ensuring good government. They do not have diplomatic recognition as independent states, but neither are they integrated into the UK. The UK Parliament retains the ability to legislate for the crown dependencies even without the agreement of their legislatures. No crown dependency has representation in the UK Parliament.

Although they are British Overseas Territories , Bermuda and Gibraltar have similar relationships to the UK as do the Crown Dependencies. While the United Kingdom is officially responsible for their defence and international representation, these jurisdictions maintain their own militaries and have been granted limited diplomatic powers, in addition to having internal self-government.

New Zealand and its dependencies share the same governor-general and constitute one monarchic realm . The Cook Islands and Niue are officially termed associated states .

Puerto Rico (since 1952) and the Northern Mariana Islands (since 1986) are non-independent states freely associated with the United States. The mutually negotiated Covenant to Establish a Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI) in Political Union with the United States was approved in 1976. The covenant was fully implemented on November 3, 1986, under Presidential Proclamation no. 5564, which conferred U.S. citizenship on legally qualified CNMI residents.

[ 34 ] Under the Constitution of Puerto Rico , Puerto Rico is described as a Commonwealth and Puerto Ricans have a degree of administrative autonomy similar to that of a citizen of a U.S. state . Puerto Ricans "were collectively made U.S. citizens " in 1917, as a result of the Jones–Shafroth Act .

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] The commonly used name in Spanish of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Estado Libre Asociado de Puerto Rico , literally "Associated Free State of Puerto Rico", which sounds similar to "free association" particularly when loosely used in Spanish, is sometimes erroneously interpreted to mean that Puerto Rico's relationship with the United States is based on a Compact of Free Association and at other times is erroneously held to mean that Puerto Rico's relationship with the U.S. is based on an Interstate compact . This is a constant source of ambiguity and confusion when trying to define, understand, and explain Puerto Rico's political relationship with the United States. For various reasons Puerto Rico's political status differs from that of the Pacific Islands that entered into Compacts of Free Association with the United States. As sovereign states, these islands have the full right to conduct their foreign relations, while the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico has territorial status subject to U.S. congressional authority under the Constitution's Territory Clause, "to dispose of and make all needful Rules and Regulations respecting the Territory… belonging to the United States." [ 37 ] Puerto Rico does not have the right to unilaterally declare independence, and at the last referendum (1998), the narrow majority voted for "none of the above", which was a formally undefined alternative used by commonwealth supporters to express their desire for an "enhanced commonwealth" option.

[ 37 ] This kind of relationship can also be found in the Kingdom of the Netherlands , which is termed a federacy . The European continental part is organised like a unitary state. However, the status of its "constituent countries" in the Caribbean ( Aruba , Curaçao , and Sint Maarten ) can be considered akin to dependencies [ 38 ] [ 39 ] or "associated non-independent states." The Kingdom of Denmark also operates similarly, akin to another federacy. The Faroe Islands and Greenland are two self-governing territories or regions within the Kingdom. The relationship between Denmark proper and these two territories is semi-officially termed the Rigsfællesskabet ("Unity of the Realm").

Overview of inhabited dependent territories [ edit ] Name Population (2016) [ 40 ] Area (km 2 ) [ 41 ] Area (mi 2 ) [ 41 ] UN region UN subregion Sovereign state Legal status [ 42 ] Akrotiri and Dhekelia 15,700 254 98 Asia Western Asia United Kingdom Overseas territory ( Sovereign Base Areas ) Åland 29,013 1,580 610 Europe Northern Europe Finland Autonomous region American Samoa 54,194 199 77 Oceania Polynesia United States Unincorporated unorganized territory Anguilla 15,100 91 35 Americas Caribbean United Kingdom Overseas territory Aruba 113,648 178.91 69.08 Americas Caribbean Netherlands Constituent country Bermuda 70,537 53.2 20.5 Americas Northern America United Kingdom Overseas territory British Virgin Islands 34,232 153 59 Americas Caribbean United Kingdom Overseas territory Cayman Islands 57,268 264 101.9 Americas Caribbean United Kingdom Overseas territory Christmas Island 2,205 135 52 Oceania Australia and New Zealand Australia External territory Cocos (Keeling) Islands 596 14 5.4 Oceania Australia and New Zealand Australia External territory Cook Islands 18,100 240 93 Oceania Polynesia New Zealand Associated state Curaçao 158,986 444 171 Americas Caribbean Netherlands Constituent country Falkland Islands 2,931 12,173 4,700 Americas South America United Kingdom Overseas territory Faroe Islands 49,188 4,167 540 Europe Northern Europe Denmark Autonomous territory French Polynesia 285,735 1,399 1,609 Oceania Polynesia France Overseas collectivity ( Overseas country ) Gibraltar 29,328 6.5 2.5 Europe Southern Europe United Kingdom Overseas territory Greenland 56,483 2,166,086 836,330 Americas Northern America Denmark Autonomous territory Guam 162,742 544 210 Oceania Micronesia United States Unincorporated organized territory Guernsey 63,026 65 25 Europe Northern Europe United Kingdom Crown Dependency Hong Kong 7,374,000 2,755 1,064 Asia Eastern Asia China Special administrative region Isle of Man 88,195 572 221 Europe Northern Europe United Kingdom Crown Dependency Jersey 98,069 118.2 45.6 Europe Northern Europe United Kingdom Crown Dependency Macau 650,900 115.3 44.5 Asia Eastern Asia China Special administrative region Montserrat 5,267 101 39 Americas Caribbean United Kingdom Overseas territory New Caledonia 275,355 18,576 7,172 Oceania Melanesia France Sui generis collectivity Niue 1,190 261.46 100.95 Oceania Polynesia New Zealand Associated state Norfolk Island 2,210 34.6 13.4 Oceania Australia and New Zealand Australia External territory Northern Mariana Islands 53,467 464 179 Oceania Micronesia United States Unincorporated organized territory ( Commonwealth ) Pitcairn Islands 57 43 17 Oceania Polynesia United Kingdom Overseas territory Puerto Rico 3,411,307 9,104 3,515 Americas Caribbean United States Unincorporated organized territory (Commonwealth) Saint Barthélemy 7,209 25 9.7 Americas Caribbean France Overseas collectivity Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha 5,633 394 152 Africa Western Africa United Kingdom Overseas territory Saint Martin 31,949 53.2 20.5 Americas Caribbean France Overseas collectivity Saint Pierre and Miquelon 5,595 242 93 Americas Northern America France Overseas collectivity Sint Maarten 41,486 37 14 Americas Caribbean Netherlands Constituent country Svalbard 2,667 61,022 23,561 Europe Northern Europe Norway Unincorporated area Tokelau 1,499 10 3.9 Oceania Polynesia New Zealand Dependent territory Turks and Caicos Islands 51,430 430 166 Americas Caribbean United Kingdom Overseas territory U.S. Virgin Islands 102,951 346.36 133.73 Americas Caribbean United States Unincorporated organized territory Wallis and Futuna 15,664 142 55 Oceania Polynesia France Overseas collectivity See also [ edit ] Colonisation Colony Self-governing colony Domestic dependent nations Gallery of flags of dependent territories Independence referendum Past independence referendums List of administrative divisions by country List of autonomous areas by country List of countries by United Nations geoscheme Lists of former colonies, possessions, protectorates, and territories Category:Former colonies Protectorate Timeline of national independence List of leaders of dependent territories List of sovereign states List of sovereign states and dependent territories by continent Suzerainty Vassal state Notes [ edit ] ^ Each territory in the United States Minor Outlying Islands is labeled UM- followed by the first letter of its name and another unique letter if needed.

^ The following territories do not have ISO 3166-1 codes: 1 : Akrotiri and Dhekelia 2 : Ashmore and Cartier Islands 3 : Coral Sea Islands ^ Midway Atoll and Wake Island have a few people, but these territories are not permanently inhabited.

^ Willis Island is permanently staffed and occupied by a small team of meteorologists.

^ The Antarctic claim of Adélie Land (a district of the TAAF ) [ 28 ] is not included within the ISO 3166 designation. The ISO designates the remainder of the TAAF the "French Southern Territories".

[ 29 ] References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "International Trusteeship System and Trust Territories | The United Nations and Decolonization" .

United Nations .

^ a b "United Nations General Assembly 15th Session – The Trusteeship System and Non-Self-Governing Territories (pages:509–510)" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on March 20, 2012.

^ "Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories (1945-1999)" .

United Nations . Archived from the original on 12 Jan 2017 . Retrieved 20 Jan 2023 .

^ Salesa, Damon Ieremia (2017).

Island time : New Zealand's Pacific futures . Wellington, New Zealand: Bridget Williams Books. pp.

6– 7.

ISBN 9781988533506 .

^ a b "Find a publication | New Zealand Ministry of Justice" . Archived from the original on 2016-04-29 . Retrieved 2013-11-14 .

^ a b Conan, Neal (11 August 2015).

"Pacific News Minute: Cook Islands Bid for UN Membership On Hold" . Hawai'i Public Radio. Archived from the original on 9 December 2018 . Retrieved 6 April 2019 .

^ Connell, John (2009). " 'We are not ready' : colonialism or autonomy in Tokelau". In Baldacchino, Godfrey; Milne, David (eds.).

The case for non-sovereignty : lessons from sub-national island jurisdictions . Routledge. pp.

157– 168.

ISBN 9780415455503 .

^ New Zealand and Antarctica . NZ Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade. 2010 ^ CIA (2010-07-15).

"Guernsey at the CIA's page" . CIA . Retrieved 2010-07-15 .

^ CIA (2010-07-15).

"Jersey at the CIA's page" . CIA . Retrieved 2010-07-15 .

^ CIA (2010-07-15).

"The Isle of Man at the CIA's page" . CIA . Retrieved 2010-07-15 .

^ Loft, Philip (2025-05-31).

"2025 treaty on the British Indian Ocean Territory/Chagos Archipelago" .

House of Commons Library . Retrieved 2025-05-31 .

^ "U.S. Insular Areas Application of the U.S. Constitution" (PDF) . United States General Accounting Office. November 1997. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 February 2020 . Retrieved 24 November 2020 .

^ "Definitions of Insular Area Political Organizations" . U.S. Department of the Interior. 12 June 2015 . Retrieved 6 April 2019 .

^ "U.S. Insular Areas Applicability of Relevant Provisions of the U.S. Constitution" (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: United States General Accounting Office. June 20, 1991. p. 4 . Retrieved August 14, 2021 .

^ a b International Court of Justice (2012).

"Territorial and maritime dispute (Nicaragua vs Colombia)" .

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 1, 2013 . Retrieved May 27, 2023 .

^ "Maritime Delimitation Treaty between Colombia and Honduras" (PDF) .

U.N. Delimitation Treaties InfoBase . August 2, 1986.

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 23, 2022 . Retrieved May 27, 2023 .

^ Carney, Gerard (2006).

The constitutional systems of the Australian states and territories . Canberra: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-86305-6 .

^ Phillips, Keri (23 June 2016).

"The end of Norfolk Island's self-government" .

ABC . Retrieved 11 November 2020 .

^ a b c d "Territories of Australia" . The Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Communications. 2020-02-28 . Retrieved 2020-04-25 .

The Australian Government, through the department, administers the Indian Ocean Territories of Christmas Island and the Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Norfolk Island, the Jervis Bay Territory, the Ashmore and Cartier Islands, and the Coral Sea Islands. The department also manages the Government's interests in the Australian Capital Territory, and the Northern Territory.

^ 广电总局批准31个境外频道在涉外宾馆等申请接收 Archived 2013-06-03 at the Wayback Machine . Gov.cn (2006-12-30). Retrieved on 2013-07-12.

^ 2010年第六次全国人口普查主要数据公报（第1号） Archived 2012-06-18 at the Wayback Machine . Stats.gov.cn. Retrieved on 2013-07-12.

^ 項懷誠：香港是社保基金境外投資的首選地之一 Archived 2013-06-17 at the Wayback Machine . Big5.huaxia.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-12.

^ a b c Rakitskaya, Inna A.; Molchakov, Nikita Y. (2019).

"Democratization of territorial constitution : current trends and the constitutional experience of Denmark" .

International Journal of Economics and Business Administration .

7 (1). Eleftherios Thalassinos: 166– 172.

ISSN 2241-4754 . Retrieved 11 November 2020 .

^ "Nouvelle-Calédonie Présentation" [New Caledonia Presentation].

Outre-Mer.gouv.fr (in French).

Ministre des Outre-mer . Archived from the original on 21 May 2013 . Retrieved 24 November 2020 .

^ "Field Listing :: Dependency Status" .

CIA.gov/Library/Publications/Resources/The-World-Factbook/ .

Central Intelligence Agency . Retrieved 7 April 2019 .

^ "Loi n° 55-1052 du 6 août 1955 portant statut des Terres australes et antarctiques françaises et de l'île de Clipperton" [Law n° 55-1052 of 6 August 1955 relating to the statute of the French Southern and Antarctic Lands and of the island of Clipperton].

LegiFrance.gouv.fr (in French).

Légifrance . 6 August 1955 . Retrieved 24 November 2020 .

^ a b "Antarctica :: French Southern and Antarctic Lands" .

CIA.gov/Library/Publications/The-World-Factbook .

CIA . 20 May 2020 . Retrieved 3 June 2020 .

^ "French Southern Territories" .

ISO.org .

ISO . 26 November 2018 . Retrieved 3 June 2020 .

^ Dependencies and Areas of Special Sovereignty , U.S. Department of State. "Bonaire, Saba, and Sint Eustatius now fall under the direct administration of the Netherlands". Retrieved 17 June 2016.

^ a b "Spitsbergen Treaty" .

Wikisource . 9 February 1920 . Retrieved 16 November 2020 .

^ "The Svalbard Treaty" .

Governor of Svalbard . 9 April 2008. Archived from the original on 23 July 2011 . Retrieved 24 March 2010 .

^ Skagestad, Odd Gunnar (2004). "The Scope for Norwegian Commitments Related to International Research on Jan Mayen Island". In Skreslet, Stig (ed.).

Jan Mayen Island in Scientific Focus (PDF) . Springer Netherlands. p. 272.

ISBN 978-1-4020-2955-4 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 January 2014 . Retrieved 15 November 2020 .

^ CIA (2010-07-15).

"Northern Mariana Islands at the CIA's page" . CIA . Retrieved 2010-07-15 .

^ The Louisiana Purchase and American Expansion: 1803–1898. By Sanford Levinson and Bartholomew H. Sparrow. New York: Rowman and Littlefield Publishers. 2005. Page 166, 178. "U.S. citizenship was extended to residents of Puerto Rico under the Jones Act, chap. 190, 39 Stat. 951 (1971) (codified at 48 U.S.C. § 731 (1987)") ^ CIA (2010-07-15).

"Puerto Rico at the CIA's page" . CIA . Retrieved 2010-07-15 .

^ a b "December 2005 report of the President's Task Force on Puerto Rico's Status" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on March 26, 2009.

^ "Europe :: Netherlands" .

CIA.gov/Library/Publications/The-World-Factbook .

CIA . 10 June 2020 . Retrieved 13 July 2020 .

^ "Dependencies and Areas of Special Sovereignty" .

State.gov .

United States Department of State . 7 March 2017 . Retrieved 13 July 2020 .

^ "Country Comparison :: Population" . CIA. July 2016.

^ a b "Field Listing :: Area" . CIA.

^ "Field Listing :: Dependency Status" . CIA.

Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates public domain material from The World Factbook .

CIA .

Bibliography [ edit ] George Drower, Britain's Dependent Territories , Dartmouth, 1992 George Drower, Overseas Territories Handbook , TSO, 1998 v t e Autonomous types of first-tier subdivision administration Federalism Asymmetric federalism Confederation Cooperative federalism Corporative federalism Dual federalism Ethnic federalism Federacy Federal monarchy Federal republic Federated state Federation Fiscal federalism Symmetric federalism List of federal countries Unitary state Devolution Regional state Unions Composite monarchy Dual monarchy Dynastic union Empire Colonial empire Multinational state Personal union Political union Real union Superstate Supranational union Continental union Subordinacy Associated state Client state Colony Dependent territory Direct rule Dominion Indirect rule Mandate Protectorate Puppet state Satellite state Trusteeship Tributary state Vassal state Development Annexation Cession Detachment Irredentism Military occupation Partition Secession Separatism Territorial dispute See also Autonomy Autonomous area Decentralization Hegemony Home rule Stateless nation Subsidiarity Suzerainty Tribal sovereignty v t e Empires Ancient ( colonies ) Akkadian Armenian Urartu Orontid Ancient Assyrian Middle Assyrian Neo-Assyrian Babylonian Old Babylonian Kassite Neo-Babylonian Chinese Qin Han Jin Dʿmt Egyptian Old Kingdom Middle Kingdom New Kingdom Goguryeo Harsha Hellenistic Macedonian Seleucid Ptolemaic Bactrian Indo-Greek Hittite Hunnic White Xiongnu Iranian Median Achaemenid Parthian Sasanian Kush Kushan Magadha Haryanka Shaishunaga Nanda Maurya Shunga Gupta Phoenician Carthaginian Roman Western Eastern Satavahana Neo-Sumerian Xianbei Rouran Post-classical Angevin Aragonese Armenian Bagratid Vaspurakan Artsakh Cilician Zakarid Ayyubid Aztec Benin Bornu Bruneian Bulgarian First Second Burmese First Calakmul Caliphate Rashidun Umayyad Abbasid Fatimid Chalukya Western Eastern Chinese Sui Tang Liao Song Jīn Yuan Chola Ethiopian Aksum Zagwe Solomonic Genoese Georgian Huetar Inca Kannauj Pala Gurjara-Pratihara Rashtrakuta Iranian Tahirid Saffarid Samanid Buyid Japanese Yamato Kamakura Muromachi Edo Kanem Khmer Latin Lithuanian Grand Duchy Commonwealth Majapahit Mali Mongol Yuan Golden Horde Chagatai Khanate Ilkhanate Berber Almoravid Almohad Norwegian North Sea Oyo Polish Kingdom Commonwealth Roman Byzantine Nicaea Thessalonica Trebizond Epirus Morea Romano-Germanic Carolingian Holy Roman Serbian Singhasari Songhai Srivijaya Tibetan Tikal Tiwanaku Toltec Turco-Persian Ghaznavid Great Seljuk Khwarezmian Timurid Turkic First Western Eastern Second Türgesh Uighur Kyrgyz Venetian Vietnamese Dinh Early Le Ly Tran Ho Later Tran Later Le Vijayanagara Wagadou Wari Modern Afghan Ashanti Austro-Hungarian Brazilian Burmese Second Third Central African Chinese Ming Qing China Manchukuo Contemporary Ethiopian Haitian First Second French First Second German German Empire Nazi Germany Indian Indo-Persian Mughal Sikh Iranian Safavid Afsharid Zand Qajar Pahlavi Japanese Korean Maratha Mexican First Second Mongol Oirat Khoshut Dzungar Kalmyk Bogd Moroccan Saadi 'Alawi Polish Russian Tsarist Imperial Contemporary Sokoto Somali Isaaq Warsengeli Ajuran Geledi Swedish Tongan Vietnamese Mạc Revival Lê Tay Sơn Dainam Vietnam Colonial American Austrian attempts Belgian British English Scottish Chinese Danish Dutch French German attempts Italian Venetian Genoese Maltese attempts Japanese Mongol Norwegian Omani Ottoman Polish–Lithuanian Couronian attempts Portuguese Russian Spanish Catalan-Aragonese Basque Swedish Lists Empires largest Ancient great powers Medieval great powers Modern great powers European colonialism African empires Miscellaneous Academic Anti-imperialism Cultural Ecological Green Media Nuclear Liberal Linguistic Social Soviet Theories U.S.

v t e Designations for types of administrative division English terms Common English terms Area Insular area Local government area Special area Unincorporated area Unorganized area Borough County borough Metropolitan borough Canton Half-canton Capital Federal capital Imperial capital City Autonomous city Charter city Independent city Incorporated city Imperial city Free imperial city Royal free city Community Autonomous community Residential community County Administrative county Autonomous county Consolidated city-county County seat County town Metropolitan county Non-metropolitan county Regional county municipality Viscounty Country Overseas country Department Overseas department District Capital district City district Congressional district Electoral district Federal district Indian government district Land district Local government district Metropolitan district Non-metropolitan district Military district Municipal district Police district Regional district Rural district Sanitary district Service district Educational service district Local service district School district Intermediate school district Special district in the US Urban district Division Census division Police division Subdivision of India Indian reserve/reservation Indian reservation (United States) Indian reserve (Canada) Municipality City municipality County municipality Direct-controlled municipality District municipality Neutral municipality Regional municipality Resort municipality Mountain resort municipality Rural municipality Specialized municipality Prefecture Autonomous prefecture Subprefecture Super-prefecture Praetorian prefecture Province Autonomous province Overseas province Roman province Region Administrative region Special administrative region Autonomous region Capital region National capital region Development region Mesoregion Microregion Overseas region Subregion State Proto-state City-state Federal state Free state Sovereign state Territory Capital territory Federal capital territory National capital territory Dependent territory Federal territory Incorporated territory Organized incorporated territory Overseas territory Union territory Town Census town Market town Township Charter township Civil township Paper township Survey township Urban township Unit Regional unit Zone Economic zone Exclusive economic zone Free economic zone Special economic zone Exclusion zone Military exclusion zone Free speech zone Neutral zone Self-administered zone Trade zone Free-trade zone Other English terms Current Alpine resort Bailiwick Banner Autonomous Block Cadastre Circle Circuit Colony Commune Condominium Constituency Duchy District Eldership Emirate Enclave and exclave Federal dependency Governorate Hamlet Manor Royal Muftiate Neighbourhood Parish Precinct Principality Protectorate Quarter Regency Autonomous republic Riding Sector Autonomous Shire Sultanate Suzerainty Townland Village Summer Ward Historical Agency Barony Burgh Exarchate Hide Hundred Imperial Circle March Monthon Presidency Residency Roman diocese Seat Tenth Tithing Viceroyalty Non-English terms or loanwords Current Amt Apskritis Bakhsh Barangay Bashki Bezirk Regierungsbezirk Comarca Comune Frazione Freguesia Fu Gemeinde Austria Germany South Tyrol Switzerland Gemeente Gmina Hromada Județ Kampong Kommun/Kunta Finland Sweden Län (Sweden) Landskap Finland Località Maakunta Megye Muban Mukim Njësi administrative Obec Oblast Autonomous Okrug Ostān Poblacion Purok Qark Raion Savivaldybė Selsoviet Sitio Seniūnija Shahrestān Sum China Sýsla Tehsil Townlet Vingtaine Historical Commote Gau Heerlijkheid Komunë Köping Korale Län/Lääni Landskap Sweden Landskommun Maalaiskunta Nome Egypt Greece Pagus Pargana Plasă Rreth Satrapy Socken Subah Syssel Zhou Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics .

See also Autonomous administration Census division Electoral district List of administrative divisions by country Greek administrative divisions Slavic administrative divisions v t e United Nations list of non-self-governing territories France French Polynesia New Caledonia New Zealand Tokelau United Kingdom Anguilla Bermuda British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Falkland Islands Gibraltar Montserrat Pitcairn Saint Helena Turks and Caicos Islands United States American Samoa Guam United States Virgin Islands None ( de facto ) † Western Sahara † Spain unilaterally abandoned its responsibilities over Western Sahara in 1976, but remains as its de jure administering power.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dependent_territory&oldid=1303149414 " Categories : Dependent territories Lists of countries Territories Self-governance Sovereignty Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from October 2020 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from April 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the World Factbook This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 09:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dependent territory 75 languages Add topic

