Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Applications 2 Measuring techniques 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Geodetic astronomy 12 languages Deutsch Eesti Español Հայերեն Қазақша Lëtzebuergesch Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Română Русский Српски / srpski Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Using stars to measure Earth This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Geodetic astronomy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Geodetic astronomy or astronomical geodesy ( astro-geodesy ) is the application of astronomical methods into geodetic networks and other technical projects of geodesy .

Applications [ edit ] The most important applications are: Establishment of geodetic datum systems (e.g.

ED50 ) or at expeditions apparent places of stars, and their proper motions precise astronomical navigation astro-geodetic geoid determination modelling the rock densities of the topography and of geological layers in the subsurface Monitoring of the Earth rotation and polar wandering Contribution to the time system of physics and geosciences Measuring techniques [ edit ] Important measuring techniques are: Latitude determination and longitude determination , by theodolites , tacheometers, astrolabes or zenith cameras time and star positions by observation of star transits , e.g. by meridian circles (visual, photographic or CCD ) Azimuth determination for the exact orientation of geodetic networks for mutual transformations between terrestrial and space methods for improved accuracy by means of " Laplace points " at special fixed points Vertical deflection determination and their use in geoid determination in mathematical reduction of very precise networks for geophysical and geological purposes (see above) Modern spatial methods VLBI with radio sources ( quasars ) Astrometry of stars by scanning satellites like Hipparcos or the future Gaia .

The accuracy of these methods depends on the instrument and its spectral wavelength, the measuring or scanning method, the time amount (versus economy), the atmospheric situation, the stability of the surface resp. the satellite, on mechanical and temperature effects to the instrument, on the experience and skill of the observer , and on the accuracy of the physical-mathematical models . Changing weather or atmospheric conditions near the observation site can negatively affect atmospheric refraction in the zenithal direction , referred to as anomalous or zenithal refraction ; anomalous refraction is considered to be the primary source of error in geodetic astronomy deflection data.

[ 1 ] Therefore, the accuracy reaches from 60" (navigation, ~1 mile) to 0,001" and better (a few cm; satellites, VLBI), e.g.: angles ( vertical deflections and azimuths ) ±1" up to 0,1" geoid determination & height systems ca. 5 cm up to 0,2 cm astronomical lat/long and star positions ±1" up to 0,01" HIPPARCOS star positions ±0,001" VLBI quasar positions and Earth's rotation poles 0,001 to 0,0001" (cm...mm) Astrogeodetic leveling is a local geoid determination method based on vertical deflection measurements.

[ 2 ] Given a starting value at one point, determining the geoid undulations for an area becomes a matter for simple integration of vertical deflection, as it represents the horizontal spatial gradient of the geoid undulation.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Arc measurement — determining the curvature of Earth's surface by comparing astronomical observations to distance measurements Celestial navigation — determining a ship's position using astronomical observations Satellite geodesy Spherical astronomy Space geodesy ET Stellar triangulation Triangulation (surveying) Zenith camera References [ edit ] ^ Hirt, Christian; Bürki, Beat (2006).

"Status of Geodetic Astronomy at the Beginning of the 21st Century" (PDF) .

Geodäsie und Geoinformatik der Universität Hannover (258): 81– 99 . Retrieved 1 June 2025 .

^ "Geoid Evaluation" .

National Geodetic Survey .

NOAA . 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2025 .

^ Jekeli, Christopher; Kwon, Jay H. (October 2002).

"Geoid profile determination by direct integration of GPS inertial navigation system vector gravimetry" .

Solid Earth .

107 (B10): ETG 3-1–ETC 3-10.

doi : 10.1029/2001JB001626 .

^ "Deflection of the vertical" .

UNTERM .

United Nations . Retrieved 1 June 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Thomson, D. B.

"Introduction to Geodetic Astronomy" (PDF) . Department of Geodesy and Geomatics Engineering University of New Brunswick.

"Geodetic Astronomy at NGS: Past and Present" .

geodesy.noaa.gov . NOAA.

Portals : Astronomy Stars Spaceflight Outer space Solar System v t e Geodesy Overview Geodesists History Timeline Subfields Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Earth's orbit Geodetic astronomy Geomatics Gravity of Earth Navigation Photogrammetry Remote Sensing Geopositioning Virtual globe Physical phenomena Chandler wobble Coriolis effect Earth's energy budget Earth's gravity field Geodynamo Gravity of Earth Plate tectonics Precession of the equinoxes Tide Related disciplines Astronomy Geology Geophysics Mathematics Physics Geodesy portal Category Commons Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic 2 Other NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geodetic_astronomy&oldid=1296418459 " Categories : Astronomical sub-disciplines Geodesy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2025 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 22:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geodetic astronomy 12 languages Add topic

