Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early years 2 Trinity College, Dublin 3 Career 4 Bishop of Cloyne 5 Family 6 References Toggle the table of contents Patrick Sheridan (Bishop of Cloyne) Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dr.

Patrick Sheridan (c. 1638 – 22 November 1682) was the Church of Ireland Bishop of Cloyne between 1679 and 1682.

Early years [ edit ] Sheridan was born at Enniskillen , County Fermanagh , Ireland , the son of Reverend Dennis Sheridan, rector of Killesher parish, County Fermanagh . His brothers included William Sheridan (Bishop of Kilmore and Ardagh) and Sir Thomas Sheridan (politician) , Chief Secretary of State for Ireland (1687–1688). His primary school teachers were Sheridan, Bedloe and Wilson.

Trinity College, Dublin [ edit ] On 15 May 1652 at the age of 14, Sheridan entered Trinity College, Dublin and later graduated from there as a Master of Arts.

[ 1 ] In 1660 he became a Fellow of the College, on 20 November 1665 a Senior Fellow, in 1666 a Vice-Provost and in 1681 he became a Doctor of Divinity at the same university.

Career [ edit ] On 31 May 1662 he was appointed rector of Clonfeacle parish, County Armagh . On 12 August 1664 he was appointed Archdeacon of Dromore . On 9 November 1667 he was appointed Dean of Connor . In 1668 he was appointed rector of Conwal Parish Church (Church of Ireland) in Raphoe Diocese.

Bishop of Cloyne [ edit ] He was nominated as Bishop of Cloyne on 11 February and was consecrated at Cashel Cathedral in Cashel, County Tipperary on 27 April 1679 by the Archbishop of Cashel, Thomas Price , assisted by the bishops of Killaloe , Waterford and Cork .

[ 2 ] He later applied to James Butler, 1st Duke of Ormonde to be appointed Bishop of Derry but Sir Leoline Jenkins objected because Sheridan was notorious for his non-residency in the diocese of Cloyne. Sheridan died in Dublin on 22 November 1682 and is buried in the chapel of Trinity College, but no headstone remains.

[ 3 ] Family [ edit ] In 1677 Sheridan married Anne Hill, widow of Lieutenant-Colonel Moyses Hill and the daughter and co-heir of Francis Hill and Ursula Stafford of Hill Hall, Drumbeg , County Down . They had no children and she died in July 1683.

[ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Alumni Dublinenses : a register of the students, graduates, professors and provosts of Trinity College in the University of Dublin (1593–1860)" George Dames Burtchaell / Thomas Ulick Sadleir Supplement p749: Dublin, Alex Thom and Co, 1935 ^ Ware, J.; Harris, W. (1739).

The whole works of Sir James Ware concerning Ireland . Vol. 1. Printed for the author by E. Jones. p. 243 . Retrieved 8 January 2017 .

^ Brady, W.M. (1864).

Clerical and Parochial Records of Cork, Cloyne, and Ross, Taken from Diocesan and Parish Registries, Mss. in the Principal Libraries and Public Offices of Oxford, Dublin, and London, and from Private Or Family Papers . Vol. 2. author . Retrieved 8 January 2017 .

^ Camden Society (Great Britain); Royal Historical Society (Great Britain) (1872).

Works of the Camden Society . Camden Society. p. 207 . Retrieved 8 January 2017 .

v t e Deans of Connor Milo Whale Robert Openshawe Richard Shuckburgh Robert Price Francis Marsh George Rust Patrick Sheridan Thomas Ward George Story Martin Baxter Owen Lloyd George Cuppaidge John Walsh Hill Benson Richard Dobbs Thomas Graves Theophilus Blakely Henry Leslie John Chaine George Bull John Murray Charles Seaver Walter Riddall John Bristow William Dowse Maurice Collis John Cooke Richard Breene Richard Adams Gilbert Wilson Norman Barr Lex Fair Frederick Rusk Brian Moller John Bond Sam Wright v t e Archdeacons of Dromore Andreas Tomas O'Mostead Adam M'Gynd John M'Gilboy John O'Shiegel Arthur M'Gynd Donald O'Morrey Henry Sharpe George Wright Francis Reddington Thomas Bayly Patrick Sheridan Francis Marsh Patrick Sheridan Roger Waring Henry Jenney George Howse Conway Benning Stewart Blacker Pierce Meade James Saurin Henry Stewart Theophilus Campbell Jonathan Harding Edward Atkinson William Kerr Samuel Crooks Jack Shearer William Neill Ken Good David Chillingworth John Scott Roderic West Mark Harvey v t e Bishops of Cloyne George Synge Patrick Sheridan Edward Jones William Palliser Tobias Pullen St George Ashe John Pooley Charles Crow Henry Maule Edward Synge George Berkeley James Stopford Robert Johnson Frederick Hervey Charles Agar George Chinnery Richard Woodward William Bennet Charles Warburton John Brinkley Authority control databases : People Ireland Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Patrick_Sheridan_(Bishop_of_Cloyne)&oldid=1157714117 " Categories : 1630s births 1682 deaths Archdeacons of Dromore Bishops of Cloyne Deans of Connor People from Enniskillen Christian clergy from County Fermanagh Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from June 2021 Use Hiberno-English from June 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in Hiberno-English Year of birth uncertain This page was last edited on 30 May 2023, at 13:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Patrick Sheridan (Bishop of Cloyne) Add languages Add topic

