Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Philosophy 3 See also 4 Citations 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Hegesias of Cyrene 26 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Galego 한국어 Italiano Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cyrenaic philosopher (active 290 BC) For other people named Hegesias, see Hegesias (disambiguation) .

Hegesias ( Ancient Greek : Ἡγησίας ; fl.

290 BC [ 1 ] ) of Cyrene was a Cyrenaic philosopher . He argued that eudaimonia (happiness) is impossible to achieve, and that the goal of life should be the avoidance of pain and sorrow . Conventional values such as wealth, poverty, freedom, and slavery are all indifferent and produce no more pleasure than pain.

Cicero claims that Hegesias wrote a book called ἀποκαρτερῶν ( Death by Starvation ), which persuaded so many people that death is more desirable than life that Hegesias was banned from teaching in Alexandria . It has been thought by some that Hegesias was influenced by Buddhist teachings.

[ 2 ] Life [ edit ] Ruins of Cyrene , in the northwest of modern Libya , where Hegesias lived.

Diogenes Laërtius describes Hegesias as the pupil of Paraebates , who was a pupil of Epitimides , who was a pupil of Antipater of Cyrene , who was a pupil of Aristippus (c. 435 – c. 360 BC). He was the fellow-student of Anniceris , but he differed from Anniceris by presenting the system which Anniceris softened and improved in its most nihilistic form.

[ 3 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Cyrenaics Hegesias followed Aristippus in considering pleasure as the goal of life; but, the view which he took of human life was more pessimistic. Because eudaimonia was unattainable, the sage 's goal should be to become free from pain and sorrow. Since, too, every person is self-sufficient, all external goods were rejected as not being true sources of pleasure: Complete happiness cannot possibly exist; for that the body is full of many sensations, and that the mind sympathizes with the body, and is troubled when that is troubled, and also that fortune prevents many things which we cherished in anticipation; so that for all these reasons, perfect happiness eludes our grasp. Moreover, that both life and death are desirable. They also say that there is nothing naturally pleasant or unpleasant, but that owing to want, or rarity, or satiety, some people are pleased and some vexed; and that wealth and poverty have no influence at all on pleasure, for that rich people are not affected by pleasure in a different manner from poor people. In the same way they say that slavery and freedom are things indifferent, if measured by the standard of pleasure, and nobility and baseness of birth, and glory and infamy. They add that, for the foolish person it is expedient to live, but to the wise person it is a matter of indifference; and that the wise person will do everything for his own sake; for that he will not consider any one else of equal importance with himself; and he will see that if he were to obtain ever such great advantages from any one else, they would not be equal to what he could himself bestow.

[ 3 ] Hence the sage ought to regard nothing but himself; action is quite indifferent; and if action, so also is life, which, therefore, is in no way more desirable than death: The wise person would not be so much absorbed in the pursuit of what is good, as in the attempt to avoid what is bad, considering the chief good to be living free from all trouble and pain: and that this end was attained best by those who looked upon the efficient causes of pleasure as indifferent.

[ 3 ] None of this, however, is as strong as the testimony of Cicero , [ 4 ] who claims that Hegesias wrote a book called Death by Starvation ( Greek : ἀποκαρτερῶν ), in which a man who has resolved to starve himself is introduced as representing to his friends that death is actually more to be desired than life, and that the gloomy descriptions of human misery which this work contained were so overpowering that they inspired many people to kill themselves, in consequence of which the author received the surname of Death-persuader (Peisithanatos). The book was said to have been published at Alexandria , where he was, in consequence, forbidden to teach by king Ptolemy II Philadelphus (285–246 BC).

See also [ edit ] Existential nihilism Philosophical pessimism Citations [ edit ] ^ Dorandi 1999 , p. 47.

^ Preus, Anthony (February 12, 2015).

Historical Dictionary of Ancient Greek Philosophy . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 9781442246393 – via Google Books.

^ a b c Laërtius, Diogenes .

"Socrates, with predecessors and followers: Hegesias (subsection of Aristippus)" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 1:2. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library. § 93–96.

^ Cicero, Tusculanae Quaestiones i. 34 References [ edit ] Dorandi, Tiziano (1999). "Chapter 2: Chronology". In Algra, Keimpe; et al. (eds.).

The Cambridge History of Hellenistic Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 47.

ISBN 9780521250283 .

Lafont, Jean-Marie.

"INALCO" .

Les Dossiers d'Archéologie (254): 78.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1870).

"Hegesias" .

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology .

External links [ edit ] Cicero's Tusculum Disputations , which talks about Hegesias's Death by Starvation The Most Depressing Book Ever Written: Death by Starvation by Hegesias of Kyrene , with summary, background, and discussion of purpose v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany People Deutsche Biographie NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐mfmqb
Cached time: 20250815005826
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.444 seconds
Real time usage: 0.575 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1395/1000000
Revision size: 6330/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 96099/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 938/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 9/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 30153/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.319/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16813959/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  505.131      1 -total
 24.71%  124.807     11 Template:Navbox
 22.32%  112.760      2 Template:Langx
 21.08%  106.496      1 Template:Reflist
 19.51%   98.568      1 Template:Ancient_Greek_schools_of_philosophy
 16.83%   84.990      3 Template:Cite_book
 12.50%   63.153      1 Template:Short_description
  6.79%   34.318      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.58%   28.163      1 Template:Authority_control
  5.45%   27.511      1 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3019659:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815005826 and revision id 1296774166. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hegesias_of_Cyrene&oldid=1296774166 " Categories : 3rd-century BC Greek philosophers Ancient Greek ethicists Cyrenaic philosophers Indo-Greek religions and philosophy Buddhism in the ancient Mediterranean Religion in Libya Hellenistic-era philosophers from Africa Philosophers of pessimism Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Greek-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRBM This page was last edited on 22 June 2025, at 05:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hegesias of Cyrene 26 languages Add topic

