Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Activities Toggle Activities subsection 1.1 Intellectual property studies 1.2 Other publications 2 Funding 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Alexis de Tocqueville Institution 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American conservative think tank Alexis de Tocqueville Institution Abbreviation AdTI Named after Alexis de Tocqueville Formation 29 July 1985 ( 1985-07-29 ) Dissolved 2007 Type 501(c)(3) Headquarters New York City , U.S.

President Ken Brown Chairman Gregory Fossedal This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The Alexis de Tocqueville Institution ( AdTI ) was a Washington, D.C.

–based think tank .

AdTI was named after the French historian Alexis de Tocqueville . Founded in 1988, its president was Ken Brown and its chairman was Gregory Fossedal . At its peak it had 14 full-time staff researchers. In 2006, the organization ceased most operations, issuing its last press release in 2007 to announce that its former chairman, Mike Gravel , was running for President of the United States.

Activities [ edit ] Intellectual property studies [ edit ] The AdTI published a series of studies beginning in 2002 on the theme of intellectual property in the software industry. The Institution authored Opening the Open Source Debate (June 2002), a report critical of Microsoft's open-source rivals. This report claimed that open source software was inherently less secure than proprietary software and hence a particular target for terrorists .

These studies culminated in Samizdat: And Other Issues Regarding the 'Source' of Open Source Code (prereleased May 2004), questioning the generally accepted provenance of Linux and other open source projects, and recommending that government-funded programming should never be licensed under the GNU General Public License but under the BSD license or similar licenses.  While the book called for increased investment in open source development, it criticized what it called "hybrid" source models, in which true open source code is mixed with proprietary code, with the result that intellectual property rights are nullified.

[ 2 ] To illustrate potential problems with this approach, the book cited the case of Linus Torvalds , creator of Linux . It claimed Torvalds used source code taken from Minix , a small Unix-like operating system used in teaching computer science , to create Linux 0.01, on the theory that no mere student could write an entire Unix-like kernel single-handedly—although writing a kernel of similar size and capabilities is a standard part of many computer science degrees.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] These claims have been seriously questioned, including by many of those quoted in support, such as Andrew S. Tanenbaum , author of Minix; Dennis Ritchie , one of the creators of Unix; and Richard Stallman , leader of the GNU project. Others have said that quotes attributed as being from an "interview with AdTI" were in fact from prerelease papers ( Ilkka Tuomi ) or from message board posts (Charles Mills, Henry Jones).

Alexey Toptygin said he had been commissioned by Brown to find similarities between Minix and Linux 0.01 source code, and found no support for the theory that Minix source code had been used to create Linux; [ 6 ] this study is not mentioned in the book.

It cited a number of arguments for the claim, including an email from Tanenbaum saying MINIX "was the base" Torvalds used to create Linux. Tanenbaum later published a refutation of the book's interpretation, wherein he recounted an interview with Ken Brown while the latter was researching the book, during which Tanenbaum had emphatically stated his belief that Torvalds wrote Linux single-handedly and provided examples of other people or small teams who had performed similar feats in the past.

[ 7 ] The AdTI was preparing a new study in November 2004, tentatively titled Intellectual Property Left , to argue that "the IT industry sector's reluctance to pursue rampant IP infringement against public domain software developers and users is going to precipitate billions of dollars in balance sheet downgrades by Wall Street." [ 8 ] The later papers stand in contrast to the Institution's 2000 paper, The Market Place Should Rule on Technology , which discusses Linux as a direct competitor to Microsoft Windows .

Other publications [ edit ] The AdTI produced a number of papers on education policy.

[ which?

] When the B-2 bomber program was threatened in 1995, the AdTI organised a letter to President Bill Clinton signed by seven former Pentagon chiefs: Dick Cheney , Caspar Weinberger , Frank Carlucci , Harold Brown , James Schlesinger , Donald Rumsfeld and Melvin Laird .

[ 9 ] The AdTI published Newt Gingrich 's 2003 book, Saving Lives & Saving Money: Transforming Health and Healthcare .

[ 10 ] AdTI was a member organization of the Cooler Heads Coalition which asserts that "the science of global warming is uncertain" and is focused on "dispelling the myths of global warming by exposing flawed economic, scientific, and risk analysis".

[ 11 ] Funding [ edit ] Microsoft had been one of the Institution's backers for five years, although a Microsoft spokesman said they had not funded any specific research.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] References [ edit ] ^ AdTI.

"Mission" . Archived from the original on 1 June 2006 . Retrieved 26 May 2015 .

^ Brown, Kenneth (4 June 2004).

"Samizdat's critics... Brown replies" . Archived from the original on 29 December 2010 . Retrieved 11 September 2010 .

^ "COMP_SCI 446: Kernel and Other Low-level Software Development | Computer Science | Northwestern Engineering" .

www.mccormick.northwestern.edu . Retrieved 13 August 2024 .

^ Hess, Rob; Paulson, Paul (10 March 2010).

"Linux kernel projects for an undergraduate operating systems course" .

Proceedings of the 41st ACM technical symposium on Computer science education . SIGCSE '10. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. pp.

485– 489.

doi : 10.1145/1734263.1734428 .

ISBN 978-1-4503-0006-3 .

^ Cutler, Cody; Kaashoek, M. Frans; Morris, Robert T. (8 October 2018).

"The benefits and costs of writing a POSIX kernel in a high-level language" .

Proceedings of the 13th USENIX Conference on Operating Systems Design and Implementation . OSDI'18. USA: USENIX Association: 89– 105.

ISBN 978-1-931971-47-8 .

^ "Language Log: From scratch" .

itre.cis.upenn.edu . Retrieved 13 August 2024 .

^ Tanenbaum, Andy (20 May 2004).

"Some Notes on the "Who wrote Linux" Kerfuffle, Release 1.5" . Archived from the original on 18 August 2010 . Retrieved 13 December 2015 .

I said that to the best of my knowledge, Linus wrote the whole kernel himself, but after it was released, other people began improving the kernel, which was very primitive initially, and adding new software to the system – essentially the same development model as MINIX. [...] By the time Linus started, five people or small teams had independently implemented the UNIX kernel or something approximating it, namely, Thompson, Coherent, Holt, Comer, and me. All of this was perfectly legal and nobody stole anything. Given this history, it is pretty hard to make a case that one person can't implement a system of the complexity of Linux, whose original size was about the same as V1.0 of MINIX.

^ Stapleton, Lisa (1 December 2004).

"ADTI: Ready for Round Three with Open Sourcers" .

Linux Insider . ECT News Network, Inc.

Archived from the original on 27 November 2010 . Retrieved 11 September 2010 .

^ "The Best Defense: The B-2 Bomber" .

OpenSecrets.org . Archived from the original on 15 October 2007.

^ Gingrich, Newt , Dana Pavey, and Anne Woodbury.

Saving Lives & Saving Money: Transforming Health and Healthcare . Washington, DC: Alexis de Tocqueville Institution, 2003.

ISBN 978-0-9705485-4-2 ^ "The Cooler Heads Coalition" .

GlobalWarming.org . 4 February 2004. Archived from the original on 27 April 2006.

^ Lemos, Robert.

"Linux makes a run for government" .

CNET .

^ Carney, Dan; Borrus, Amy; Greene, Jay (15 May 2000).

"Microsoft's All-Out Counterattack" .

BusinessWeek.com . Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 18 January 2011 . Retrieved 11 September 2010 .

External links [ edit ] "Official website" . Archived from the original on 3 September 2005 . Retrieved 20 May 2004 .

"Did MS Pay for Open-Source Scare? (Wired News, 5 June 2002)" . Archived from the original on 29 January 2007 . Retrieved 20 May 2004 .

Accusatory Study: Many Open-Sourcers Steal Code (LinuxInsider, 19 May 2004) "AdTI notes recent attacks on web site (press release, 3 June 2004)" . Archived from the original on 27 November 2008 . Retrieved 1 January 2015 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alexis_de_Tocqueville_Institution&oldid=1283289636 " Categories : Climate change denial Think tanks established in 1988 Political and economic think tanks in the United States Organizations of environmentalism skeptics and critics 2007 disestablishments in Washington, D.C.

Think tanks based in Washington, D.C.

Alexis de Tocqueville Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2024 Pages using infobox organization with unknown parameters All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2015 This page was last edited on 31 March 2025, at 15:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alexis de Tocqueville Institution 1 language Add topic

