Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Origins Toggle Origins subsection 2.1 Carter administration and Afghanistan 3 Origin and advocates Toggle Origin and advocates subsection 3.1 Advocates within the Reagan administration 3.2 Other advocates 3.3 Origin of the phrase 3.4 "Rollback" replaces "containment" and "détente" 3.5 Controversy over Nicaragua 3.6 Covert implementation 3.7 Congressional support 3.8 End of the Cold War 3.9 Margaret Thatcher's view 3.10 Iran–Contra affair 4 End 5 In popular culture 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Reagan Doctrine 30 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1980s U.S. strategy to counter Soviet influence This article is part of a series about Ronald Reagan Entertainment and personal Filmography Bibliography Speeches and debates Death Eponyms Honors Depictions music Residences Birthplace of Ronald Reagan Ronald Reagan Boyhood Home Rancho del Cielo 668 St. Cloud Road 33rd Governor of California Governorship 1969 People's Park protest Elections 1966 1970 40th President of the United States Presidency timeline Transition Inaugurations first inauguration second inauguration Presidential library Tenure Assassination attempt Invasion of Grenada Bombing of Libya Iran–Contra affair AIDS epidemic Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty Polls Scandals Reagan era Policies Domestic Economy Foreign Reagan Doctrine international trips Appointments Federal judges O'Connor Rehnquist Scalia Bork Kennedy Supreme Court candidates Presidential campaigns 1968 primaries convention 1976 primaries convention 1980 election primaries convention debates States' rights speech Reagan coalition 1984 election primaries convention debates v t e This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The Reagan Doctrine was a United States foreign policy strategy implemented by the administration of President Ronald Reagan to overwhelm the global influence of the Soviet Union in the late Cold War . As stated by Reagan in his State of the Union Address on February 6, 1985 : "We must not break faith with those who are risking their lives—on every continent from Afghanistan to Nicaragua —to defy Soviet-supported aggression and secure rights which have been ours from birth." [ 1 ] The doctrine was a centerpiece of U.S. foreign policy from the early 1980s until the end of the Cold War in 1991.

Under the Reagan Doctrine, the United States provided overt and covert aid to anti-communist guerrillas and resistance movements in an effort to " roll back " Soviet-backed pro-communist governments in Africa , Asia , and Latin America . The doctrine was designed to diminish Soviet influence in these regions as part of the administration's overall strategy to win the Cold War.

Background [ edit ] The Reagan Doctrine followed in the tradition of U.S. presidents developing foreign policy "doctrines", which were designed to reflect challenges facing international relations, and to propose foreign policy solutions. The practice began with the Monroe Doctrine in 1823, and continued with the Roosevelt Corollary , sometimes called the Roosevelt Doctrine, introduced by President Theodore Roosevelt in 1904.

The post– World War II tradition of presidential doctrines started with the Truman Doctrine in 1947, under which the U.S. provided support to the governments of Greece and Turkey as part of a Cold War strategy to keep both nations out of the Soviet sphere of influence. It was followed by the Eisenhower Doctrine , the Kennedy Doctrine , the Johnson Doctrine , the Nixon Doctrine , and the Carter Doctrine , all of which defined the foreign policy approaches of these respective U.S. presidents on some of the largest global challenges of their presidencies.

Origins [ edit ] Carter administration and Afghanistan [ edit ] Main article: Operation Cyclone President Reagan meeting with Afghan mujahideen leaders in the Oval Office in 1983 To watch the courageous Afghan freedom fighters battle modern arsenals with simple hand-held weapons is an inspiration to those who love freedom.

— U.S. President Ronald Reagan , March 21, 1983 [ 2 ] At least one component of the Reagan Doctrine technically pre-dated the administration. In Afghanistan , the Carter administration began providing limited covert military assistance to the Afghan mujahideen in an effort to drive the Soviets out of the country, or at least raise the military and political cost of the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan . The policy of aiding the mujahideen in their war against the Soviet occupation was originally proposed by Carter's National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski and was implemented by U.S. intelligence services. It enjoyed broad bipartisan political support.

Democratic congressman Charlie Wilson became obsessed with the Afghan cause, and was able to leverage his position on the House Appropriations committees to encourage other Democratic congressmen to vote for CIA Afghan war money, with the tacit approval of Speaker of the House Tip O'Neill , even as the Democratic Party lambasted Reagan for the CIA's secret war in Central America . It was a complex web of relationships described in George Crile III 's book Charlie Wilson's War .

[ 3 ] Wilson teamed with CIA manager Gust Avrakotos and formed a team of a few dozen insiders who greatly enhanced the support for the mujahideen , funneling it through Pakistani president Zia-ul-Haq's ISI . Avrakotos and Wilson charmed leaders from various anti-Soviet countries including Egypt , Saudi Arabia , Israel , and China to increase support for the rebels. Avrakotos hired Michael G. Vickers , a young paramilitary officer, to enhance the guerilla's odds by revamping the tactics, weapons, logistics, and training used by the mujahideen .

[ 3 ] Michael Pillsbury , a Pentagon official, and Vincent Cannistraro pushed the CIA to supply Stinger missiles to the rebels.

[ 3 ] Reagan's covert action program has been given credit for assisting in ending the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Origin and advocates [ edit ] With the arrival of the Reagan administration, The Heritage Foundation and other conservative foreign policy think tanks saw a political opportunity to significantly expand Carter's Afghanistan policy into a more global "doctrine", including U.S. support to anti-communist resistance movements in Soviet-allied nations in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. According to political analysts Thomas Bodenheimer and Robert Gould, "it was the Heritage Foundation that translated theory into concrete policy. Heritage targeted nine nations for regime change : Afghanistan, Angola , Cambodia , Ethiopia , Iran , Laos , Libya , Nicaragua , and Vietnam ".

[ 6 ] Throughout the 1980s, The Heritage Foundation's foreign policy expert on the Third World , Michael Johns , the foundation's principal Reagan Doctrine advocate, visited with resistance movements in Angola, Cambodia, Nicaragua, and other Soviet-supported nations and urged the Reagan administration to initiate or expand military and political support to them. Heritage Foundation foreign policy experts also endorsed the Reagan Doctrine in two of their Mandate for Leadership books, which provided comprehensive policy advice to Reagan administration officials.

[ 7 ] In fact, the doctrine only applied to Afghanistan, Cambodia, Angola, Nicaragua, and Mozambique , [ 8 ] while Afghanistan was the centerpiece of the doctrine.

[ 9 ] The result was that, unlike in Afghanistan, the Reagan Doctrine was rather quickly applied in Angola and Nicaragua, with the United States providing military support to the UNITA movement in Angola and the " Contras " in Nicaragua, but without a declaration of war against either country. Addressing The Heritage Foundation in October 1989, UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi called the efforts "a source of great support. No Angolan will forget your efforts. You have come to Jamba , and you have taken our message to Congress and the Administration".

[ 10 ] U.S. aid to UNITA began to flow overtly after Congress repealed the Clark Amendment , a long-standing legislative prohibition on military aid to UNITA.

[ 10 ] Following these victories, Johns and The Heritage Foundation urged further expanding the Reagan Doctrine to Ethiopia, where they argued that the Ethiopian famine was a product of the military and agricultural policies of Ethiopia's Soviet-supported government under Mengistu Haile Mariam . Johns and Heritage also argued that Mengistu's decision to permit Soviet naval and air presence on the Red Sea ports of Eritrea represented a strategic challenge to U.S. security interests in the Middle East and North Africa .

[ 11 ] The Heritage Foundation and the Reagan administration also sought to apply the Reagan Doctrine in Cambodia. The largest resistance movement fighting Cambodia's communist government was largely made up of members of the former Khmer Rouge regime, whose human rights record was among the worst of the 20th century. Therefore, Reagan authorized the provision of aid to a smaller Cambodian resistance movement, a coalition called the Khmer People's National Liberation Front , known as the KPNLF and then run by Son Sann ; in an effort to force an end to the Vietnamese occupation.

[ 12 ] While the Reagan Doctrine enjoyed strong support from The Heritage Foundation and the American Enterprise Institute , the libertarian-oriented Cato Institute opposed the Reagan Doctrine, arguing in 1986 that "most Third World struggles take place in arenas and involve issues far removed from legitimate American security needs. U.S. involvement in such conflicts expands the republic's already overextended commitments without achieving any significant prospective gains. Instead of draining Soviet military and financial resources, we end up dissipating our own." [ 13 ] Even Cato, however, conceded that the Reagan Doctrine had "fired the enthusiasm of the conservative movement in the United States as no foreign policy issue has done in decades". While opposing the Reagan Doctrine as an official governmental policy, Cato instead urged Congress to remove the legal barriers prohibiting private organizations and citizens from supporting these resistance movements.

[ 14 ] Advocates within the Reagan administration [ edit ] Within the Reagan administration, the doctrine was quickly embraced by nearly all of Reagan's top national security and foreign policy officials, including Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger , UN Ambassador Jeane Kirkpatrick , and a series of National Security Advisors appointed by Reagan including John Poindexter , Frank Carlucci , and Colin Powell .

[ 15 ] Reagan himself was a vocal proponent of the policy. Seeking to expand congressional support for the doctrine in his 1985 State of the Union Address in February 1985, Reagan said: "We must not break faith with those who are risking their lives ... on every continent, from Afghanistan to Nicaragua ... to defy Soviet aggression and secure rights which have been ours from birth. Support for freedom fighters is self-defense".

As part of his effort to gain congressional support for the Nicaraguan Contras, Reagan labeled the Contras "the moral equivalent of our founding fathers ", which was controversial because the Contras had shown disregard for human rights .

[ 16 ] There also were allegations that some members of the Contra leadership were involved in cocaine trafficking.

[ 17 ] Reagan and other conservative advocates of the Reagan Doctrine advocates also argued that the doctrine served U.S. foreign policy and strategic objectives and was a moral imperative against the Soviet Union, which Reagan, his advisers, and supporters labeled an " evil empire ".

Other advocates [ edit ] Other early conservative advocates for the Reagan Doctrine included influential activist Grover Norquist , who ultimately became a registered UNITA lobbyist and an economic adviser to Savimbi's UNITA movement in Angola, [ 18 ] and former Reagan speechwriter and former U.S. congressman Dana Rohrabacher , who made several secret visits with the mujahideen in Afghanistan and returned with glowing reports of their bravery against the Soviet occupation.

[ 19 ] Rohrabacher was led to Afghanistan by his contact with the mujahideen , Jack Wheeler.

[ 20 ] Origin of the phrase [ edit ] In 1985, as U.S. support was flowing to the mujahideen , Savimbi's UNITA, and the Nicaraguan Contras, columnist Charles Krauthammer , in an essay for Time magazine, labeled the policy the "Reagan Doctrine," and the name stuck.

[ 21 ] Krauthammer has said of his writing in support of the Reagan Doctrine, I basically came to the conclusion ... the Soviets had overextended their empire, and they were getting what the West had gotten with its overextended empire decades before a reaction, they got a rebellion, they got resistance. And the Soviets were now beginning to feel it, and the genius of Reagan, although I don't think they had a plan in doing this is he instinctively realized that one of the ways to go after the Soviets was indirect, and that is you go after their proxies, you go after their allies, you go after their clients, or even in Afghanistan you go after them directly. So that's what I called the Reagan Doctrine, it was sort of the opposite of the Brezhnev Doctrine , which was whatever we control we keep. And Reagan was saying, no you don't.

[ 22 ] "Rollback" replaces "containment" and "détente" [ edit ] U.S.-supported UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi The Reagan Doctrine was especially significant because it represented a substantial shift in the post–World War II foreign policy of the United States. Prior to the Reagan Doctrine, U.S. foreign policy in the Cold War was rooted in " containment ", as originally defined by George F. Kennan , John Foster Dulles , and other post–World War II U.S. foreign policy experts. In January 1977, four years prior to becoming president, Reagan bluntly stated, in a conversation with National Security Advisor Richard V. Allen , his basic expectation in relation to the Cold War. "My idea of American policy toward the Soviet Union is simple, and some would say simplistic," he said. "It is this: We win and they lose. What do you think of that?" [ 23 ] Although a similar policy of "rollback" had been considered on a few occasions during the Cold War, the U.S., fearing an escalation of the Cold War and possible nuclear conflict , chose not to confront the Soviet Union directly. With the Reagan Doctrine, those fears were set aside and the United States began to openly confront Soviet-supported governments through support of rebel movements in the doctrine's targeted countries.

One perceived benefit of the Reagan Doctrine was the relatively low cost of supporting guerrilla forces compared to the Soviet Union's expenses in propping up client states. Another benefit was the lack of direct involvement of American troops, which allowed the United States to confront Soviet allies without sustaining casualties. Especially since the September 11 attacks , some Reagan Doctrine critics have argued that, by facilitating the transfer of large amounts of weapons to various areas of the world and by training military leaders in these regions, the Reagan Doctrine actually contributed to " blowback " by strengthening some political and military movements that ultimately developed hostility toward the U.S., such as al-Qaeda in Afghanistan .

[ 24 ] However, no direct U.S. aid to Osama bin Laden or any of his affiliates has ever been established.

[ 25 ] Controversy over Nicaragua [ edit ] Further information: United States and state-sponsored terrorism § Nicaragua , and Contras Historian Greg Grandin described a disjuncture between official ideals preached by the United States and actual U.S. support for terrorism. "Nicaragua, where the United States backed not a counter insurgent state but anti-communist mercenaries , likewise represented a disjuncture between the idealism used to justify U.S. policy and its support for political terrorism. ... The corollary to the idealism embraced by the Republicans in the realm of diplomatic public policy debate was thus political terror. In the dirtiest of Latin America's dirty wars, their faith in America's mission justified atrocities in the name of liberty".

[ 26 ] Grandin examined the behaviour of the U.S.-backed Contras and found evidence that it was particularly inhumane and vicious: "In Nicaragua, the U.S.-backed Contras decapitated, castrated, and otherwise mutilated civilians and foreign aid workers. Some earned a reputation for using spoons to gouge their victims' eyes out. In one raid, Contras cut the breasts of a civilian defender to pieces and ripped the flesh off the bones of another." [ 27 ] Professor Frederick H. Gareau has written that the Contras "attacked bridges, electric generators, but also state-owned agricultural cooperatives, rural health clinics, villages, and non-combatants ". U.S. agents were directly involved in the fighting. "CIA commandos launched a series of sabotage raids on Nicaraguan port facilities. They mined the country's major ports and set fire to its largest oil storage facilities." In 1984, Congress ordered this intervention to be stopped; however, it was later shown that the Reagan administration illegally continued (see Iran–Contra affair ). Gareau has characterized these acts as "wholesale terrorism" by the United States.

[ 28 ] A CIA manual for training the Contras in psychological operations , leaked to the media in 1984, entitled "Psychological Operations in Guerrilla War".

[ 29 ] recommended "selective use of violence for propagandistic effects" and to "neutralize" government officials. Contras were taught to lead: ... selective use of armed force for PSYOP psychological operations effect. ... Carefully selected, planned targets – judges, police officials, tax collectors, etc. – may be removed for PSYOP effect in a UWOA unconventional warfare operations area, but extensive precautions must insure that the people "concur" in such an act by thorough explanatory canvassing among the affected populace before and after conduct of the mission.

— James Bovard, Freedom Daily [ 30 ] Similarly, former diplomat Clara Nieto, in her book Masters of War , charged that "the CIA launched a series of terrorist actions from the "mothership" off Nicaragua's coast. In September 1983, she charged the agency attacked Puerto Sandino , Nicaragua's largest port, with rockets. The following month, frogmen blew up the underwater oil pipeline in the same port – the only one in the country. In October there was an attack on Puerto Corinto with mortars, rockets, and grenades blowing up five large oil and gasoline storage tanks. More than a hundred people were wounded, and the fierce fire, which could not be brought under control for two days, forced the evacuation of 23,000 people." [ 31 ] The International Court of Justice , when judging the case of Nicaragua v. United States in 1984, found that the United States was obligated to pay reparations to Nicaragua, because it had violated international law by actively supporting the Contras in their rebellion and by mining the Naval waters of Nicaragua.

[ 32 ] The U.S. refused to participate in the proceedings after the Court rejected its argument that the ICJ lacked jurisdiction to hear the case. The U.S. later blocked the enforcement of the judgment by exercising its veto power in the United Nations Security Council and so prevented Nicaragua from obtaining any actual compensation.

[ 33 ] Covert implementation [ edit ] As the Reagan administration set about implementing The Heritage Foundation's plan in Afghanistan, Angola, and Nicaragua, it first attempted to do so covertly, not as part of official policy. "The Reagan government's initial implementation of the Heritage plan was done covertly", according to the book Rollback , "following the longstanding custom that containment can be overt but rollback should be covert". Ultimately, however, the administration supported the policy more openly.

Congressional support [ edit ] While the doctrine benefited from strong support from the Reagan administration, The Heritage Foundation and several influential members of Congress, many votes on critical funding for resistance movements, especially the Nicaraguan Contras, were extremely close, making the Reagan Doctrine one of the more contentious American political issues of the 1980s.

[ 34 ] End of the Cold War [ edit ] As arms flowed to the contras, Savimbi's UNITA and the mujahideen , advocates of the Reagan Doctrine argued that the doctrine was yielding constructive results for U.S. interests and global democracy.

In Nicaragua, pressure from the Contras led the Sandinstas to end the State of Emergency, and they subsequently lost the 1990 elections . In Afghanistan, the mujahideen bled the Soviet Union's military and paved the way for Soviet military defeat. In Angola, Savimbi's resistance ultimately led to a decision by the Soviet Union and Cuba to bring their troops and military advisors home from Angola as part of a negotiated settlement.

All of these developments were Reagan Doctrine victories, the doctrine's advocates argue, laying the ground for the ultimate dissolution of the Soviet Union .

[ 35 ] Johns later argued that "the Reagan-led effort to support freedom fighters resisting Soviet oppression led successfully to the first major military defeat of the Soviet Union ... Sending the Red Army packing from Afghanistan proved one of the single most important contributing factors in one of history's most profoundly positive and important developments".

[ 36 ] Margaret Thatcher's view [ edit ] Among others, Margaret Thatcher , Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1979 to 1990, credited the Reagan Doctrine with aiding the end of the Cold War. In December 1997, Thatcher said that the Reagan Doctrine "proclaimed that the truce with communism was over. The West would henceforth regard no area of the world as destined to forego its liberty simply because the Soviets claimed it to be within their sphere of influence. We would fight a battle of ideas against communism, and we would give material support to those who fought to recover their nations from tyranny".

[ 37 ] Iran–Contra affair [ edit ] U.S. funding for the Contras, who opposed the Sandinista government of Nicaragua, was obtained from covert sources. Congress did not authorize sufficient funds for the Contras' efforts, and the Boland Amendment barred further funding. In 1986, in an episode that became known as the Iran–Contra affair , the Reagan administration illegally facilitated the sale of arms to Iran, the subject of an arms embargo, in the hope that the arms sales would secure the release of hostages and allow U.S. intelligence agencies to fund the Contras.

End [ edit ] The Reagan Doctrine continued into the administration of Reagan's successor, George H. W. Bush , who won the presidency in November 1988. Bush's presidency featured the final years of the Cold War and the Gulf War , but the Reagan Doctrine soon faded from U.S. policy as the Cold War ended.

[ 38 ] Bush also noted a presumed peace dividend to the end of the Cold War with economic benefits of a decrease in defense spending . However, following the presidency of Bill Clinton , a change in United States foreign policy was introduced with the presidency of his son George W. Bush and the new Bush Doctrine , who increased military spending in response to the September 11 attacks.

In Nicaragua, the Contra War ended after the Sandinista government, facing military and political pressure, agreed to new elections, in which the contras' political wing participated, in 1990. In Angola, an agreement in 1989 met Savimbi's demand for the removal of Soviet, Cuban, and other military troops and advisors from Angola. Also in 1989, in relation to Afghanistan, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev labeled the war against the U.S.-supported mujahideen a "bleeding wound" and ended the Soviet occupation of the country.

[ 39 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Charlie Wilson's War , a Golden Globe Award and Oscar -nominated Universal Pictures film released in December 2007, depicts early U.S. efforts to provide military support to the Afghan mujahideen following the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.

Miami , a 1987 book by Joan Didion covers U.S. efforts to overthrow communist governments, including that of Fidel Castro in Cuba .

See also [ edit ] conservatism portal Deterrence theory Kirkpatrick Doctrine Latin America–United States relations Peace through strength Project Socrates References [ edit ] ^ Chester Pach, 'The Reagan Doctrine: Principle, Pragmatism, and Policy" Presidential Studies Quarterly , March 2006. p 75 ^ Message on the Observance of Afghanistan Day Archived 2010-11-16 at the Wayback Machine by U.S. President Ronald Reagan , March 21, 1983 ^ a b c Crile, George (2003).

Charlie Wilson's war: the extraordinary story of the largest covert operation in history . New York: Atlantic Monthly Press.

ISBN 978-0-87113-854-5 .

Archived from the original on 2013-01-03 . Retrieved 2019-08-28 .

, pp. 246, 285, 302, and elsewhere ^ "Anatomy of a Victory: CIA's Covert Afghan War" .

globalissues.org . 2 October 2001.

Archived from the original on 2009-03-26 . Retrieved 2009-02-25 .

^ Peter Schweitzer (1994).

Victory: The Reagan Administration's Secret Strategy That Hastened the Collapse of the Soviet Union (Paperback), Atlantic Monthly Press, p. 213 ^ Rollback!: Right-wing Power in U.S. Foreign Policy . South End Press. 1 July 1999. p.

82 .

ISBN 0896083454 .

^ "Think tank fosters bloodshed, terrorism" .

The Daily Cougar . 2008-08-22.

Archived from the original on 2011-07-16 . Retrieved 2012-03-25 .

^ Fischer, Beth A. (2020).

The Myth of Triumphalism: Rethinking President Reagan's Cold War Legacy . The University Press of Kentucky. p. 159.

ISBN 978-0-8131-7817-2 .

^ Brands, Hal (2016).

Making the Unipolar Moment: U.S. Foreign Policy and the Rise of the Post-Cold War Order . Cornell University Press. p. 80.

doi : 10.7591/9781501703430 .

ISBN 978-1-5017-0272-3 .

^ a b "The Coming Winds of Democracy in Angola," by Jonas Savimbi, Heritage Foundation Lecture #217, October 5, 1989.

[unfit] ^ " "A U.S. Strategy to Foster Human Rights in Ethiopia", by Michael Johns, Heritage Foundation Backgrounder #692, February 23, 1989" . Archived from the original on August 23, 2006 . Retrieved August 24, 2006 .

^ Thayer, Nate (1991). "Cambodia: Misperceptions and Peace".

The Washington Quarterly .

14 (2): 179– 191.

doi : 10.1080/01636609109477687 .

^ "Cato Institute Policy Analysis No. 74: U.S. Aid to Anti-Communist Rebels: The "Reagan Doctrine" and Its Pitfalls" (PDF) .

Cato Institute .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2014-07-14 . Retrieved 2014-07-02 .

^ "U.S. Aid to Anti-Communist Rebels: The "Reagan Doctrine" and Its Pitfalls" .

cato.org . 24 June 1986.

Archived from the original on 16 July 2012 . Retrieved 24 August 2006 .

^ Chang, Felix (February 11, 2011).

"Reagan Turns One Hundred: Foreign Policy Lessons" .

The National Interest .

Archived from the original on January 28, 2012 . Retrieved January 12, 2012 .

^ "Jeff Jacoby" .

jewishworldreview.com .

Archived from the original on 2007-09-30 . Retrieved 2006-08-26 .

^ "The Contras and Cocaine" Archived 2012-07-22 at archive.today , Progressive Review, testimony to U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Hearing on the Allegations of CIA Ties to Nicaraguan Contra Rebels and Crack Cocaine in American Cities, October 23, 1996.

^ "Savimbi's Shell Game," Bnet.com , March 1998 ^ "Profile: Dana Rohrabacher," Cooperative History Research Commons , September 17, 2001.

Archived April 18, 2006, at the Wayback Machine ^ Gregory L. Schneider, The Conservative Century: From Reaction to Revolution (NY: Rowman & Littlefield, 2009), 165-66.

ISBN 9780742542846 ^ Krauthammer, Charles (1 April 1985).

"The Reagan Doctrine" .

Time . Retrieved 26 August 2024 .

^ "Charles Krauthammer: Reflections on a Distinguished Career" .

Archived from the original on 2016-03-24 . Retrieved 2016-03-28 .

^ Allen, Richard V.

"The Man Who Won the Cold War" .

hoover.org . Archived from the original on 1 May 2011.

^ "Think Tank Fosters Bloodshed, Terrorism," The Cougar , August 25, 2008.

^ Bergen, Peter (2006).

The Osama bin Laden I Know: An Oral History of al Qaeda's Leader .

Simon and Schuster . pp.

60– 61.

ISBN 9780743295925 .

^ Grandin, Greg.

Empire's Workshop: Latin America, The United States and the Rise of the New Imperialism , Henry Holt & Company 2007, p. 89 ^ Grandin, Greg. Empire's Workshop: Latin America, The United States and the Rise of the New Imperialism , Henry Holt & Company 2007, p. 90 ^ Gareau, Frederick H. (2004).

State Terrorism and the United States . London: Zed Books. pp. 16 & 166.

ISBN 1-84277-535-9 .

^ Blum, William (2003).

Killing Hope: U.S. Military and CIA Interventions since World War II . Noida, India: Zed Books. p. 290.

ISBN 1-84277-369-0 .

Archived from the original on 2017-02-04 . Retrieved 2019-11-11 .

^ "Terrorism Debacles in the Reagan Administration" .

The Future of Freedom Foundation . Archived from the original on 2006-08-21 . Retrieved 2006-07-30 .

^ Nieto, Clara (2003).

Masters of War: Latin America and United States Aggression from the Cuban Revolution Through the Clinton Years . New York: Seven Stories Press. pp.

343– 45.

ISBN 1-58322-545-5 .

^ "Case concerning military and paramilitary activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of America), International Court of Justice, Order of 26 september 1991" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 September 2015.

^ Morrison, Fred L. (January 1987).

"Legal Issues in The Nicaragua Opinion" .

American Journal of International Law .

81 (1): 160– 66.

doi : 10.2307/2202146 .

JSTOR 2202146 . Archived from the original on 2012-02-05.

"Appraisals of the ICJ's Decision. Nicaragua vs United States (Merits)" ^ A Twilight Struggle: American Power and Nicaragua, 1977–1990 , Robert Kagan , Simon & Schuster, 1996.

^ "It Was Reagan Who Tore Down That Wall," Dinesh D'Souza , Los Angeles Times , November 7, 2004.

^ "Charlie Wilson's War Was Really America's War," by Michael Johns Archived 2011-07-08 at the Wayback Machine , January 19, 2008.

^ "Lecture to The Heritage Foundation ("The Principles of Conservatism")" .

margaretthatcher.org .

Archived from the original on 2006-08-25 . Retrieved 2006-08-26 .

^ Excerpted from The Reagan Doctrine: Third World Rollack , End Press, 1989.

Archived 2007-11-08 at the Wayback Machine ^ "The Soviet Decision to Withdraw, 1986-1988" U.S. Library of Congress Archived 2011-08-07 at the Wayback Machine .

Further reading [ edit ] Beitz, Charles R. "The Reagan Doctrine in Nicaragua." in Problems of International Justice ewd. by  Steven Luper-foy, (Routledge, 2019) pp. 182-195.

Bodenheimer, Thomas S., and Robert Gould. "US Military Doctrines and Their Relation to Foreign Policy." in Hemispheric security and US policy in Latin America (Routledge, 2019) pp. 7-32.

Carpenter, Ted Galen.

"U.S. Aid to Anti-Communist Rebels: The 'Reagan Doctrine' and its Pitfalls" , Cato Policy Analysis # 74, Cato Institute, June 24, 1986.

Garthoff, Raymond L. (1994).

The great transition: American-Soviet relations and the end of the Cold War . Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

ISBN 978-0-8157-3060-6 . Archived from the original on 2012-03-09 . Retrieved 2017-09-10 .

Greentree, Todd. "The origins of the Reagan Doctrine Wars in Angola, Central America, and Afghanistan" (Diss. University of Oxford, 2016) online .

Hopf, Ted. "Peripheral Visions: Brezhnev and Gorbachev Meet the" Reagan Doctrine"." in Learning in US and Soviet foreign policy ed by George Breslauer and Philip Tetlock. (Routledge, 2019) pp. 586-629.

Johns, Andrew L., ed.

A Companion to Ronald Reagan (John Wiley & Sons, 2014). pp 339–358.

Johns, Michael (Second Quarter 1987). "The Lessons of Afghanistan".

Policy Review (40): 32– 35.

ISSN 0146-5945 .

Johns, Michael.

"A U.S. Strategy to Foster Human Rights in Ethiopia" [unfit] , Heritage Foundation Backgrounder # 692, February 23, 1989.

Lagon,  Mark P.

The Reagan Doctrine: Sources of American Conduct in the Cold War's Last Chapter (1984) online Archived 2019-01-27 at the Wayback Machine Loconte, Joseph. "American Exceptionalism and the Reagan Doctrine: The Belief That Won the Cold War." in The Reagan Manifesto (Palgrave Macmillan, Cham, 2016) pp. 77-96.

Meiertöns, Heiko (2010).

The Doctrines of US Security Policy: An Evaluation under International Law . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-76648-7 .

Pach, Chester. “The Reagan Doctrine: Principle, Pragmatism, and Policy," Presidential Studies Quarterly (2006) 36#1 p. 75+ online Archived 2020-08-06 at the Wayback Machine Rosenfeld, Stephen S.

"The Reagan Doctrine: The Guns of July" , Foreign Affairs magazine, Spring 1986.

Schmertz,  Eric J. Natalie Datlof, and Alexej Ugrinsky eds.

President Reagan and the World (1997) online Archived 2019-01-27 at the Wayback Machine Scott, James M. "Reagan's doctrine? The formulation of an American foreign policy strategy" Presidential Studies Quarterly (1996) 26#4 pp 1047–61.

online Scott, James M.

Deciding to intervene: the Reagan doctrine and American foreign policy (1996) Starr-Deelen, Donna.

Presidential Policies on Terrorism: From Ronald Reagan to Barack Obama.

(Springer, 2014).

External links [ edit ] "The Principles of Conservatism" , by Honorable Margaret Thatcher, Heritage Foundation Lecture, December 10, 1997.

"The Ash Heap of History: President Reagan's Westminster Address 20 Years Later" , by Charles Krauthammer, Heritage Foundation Lecture, June 3, 2002.

"U.S. Aid to Anti-Communist Rebels: The 'Reagan Doctrine' and its Pitfalls" , by Ted Galen Carpenter, Cato Policy Analysis # 74, Cato Institute, June 24, 1986.

Webb, Gary (August 1996).

The Contras, Cocaine, and Covert Operations (Report).

National Security Archive .

"How We Ended the Cold War" , by John Tirman, The Nation , October 14, 1999.

"Think Tank Fosters Bloodshed, Terrorism" , The Daily Cougar , August 25, 2008.

v t e Revolutions of 1989 Internal background Era of Stagnation Communism Anti-communism Criticism of communist party rule Eastern Bloc Eastern Bloc politics Eastern Bloc media and propaganda Emigration from the Eastern Bloc KGB Nomenklatura Shortage economy Totalitarianism Anti-communist insurgencies in Central and Eastern Europe International background Active measures Cold War List of socialist states People Power Revolution Predictions of the collapse of the Soviet Union Reagan Doctrine Soviet Empire Terrorism and the Soviet Union Vatican Opposition Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia Reforms Uskorenie Perestroika Demokratizatsiya Khozraschyot 500 Days Program New political thinking Sinatra Doctrine Glasnost Reform and opening up Socialism with Chinese characteristics Đổi Mới Government leaders Ramiz Alia Nicolae Ceaușescu Mikhail Gorbachev Károly Grósz Erich Honecker Miloš Jakeš Egon Krenz Wojciech Jaruzelski Slobodan Milošević Mathieu Kérékou Mengistu Haile Mariam Ne Win Denis Sassou Nguesso Heng Samrin Deng Xiaoping Zhao Ziyang Todor Zhivkov Siad Barre Opposition methods Civil resistance Human chains Magnitizdat Polish underground press Political demonstration Protests Samizdat Strike action Opposition leaders Lech Wałęsa Václav Havel Alexander Dubček Ion Iliescu Liu Gang Wu'erkaixi Chai Ling Wang Dan Feng Congde Tank Man Joachim Gauck Sali Berisha Sanjaasürengiin Zorig Vladimir Bukovsky Boris Yeltsin Viacheslav Chornovil Vytautas Landsbergis Zianon Pazniak Zhelyu Zhelev Aung San Suu Kyi Meles Zenawi Isaias Afwerki Ronald Reagan George H. W. Bush Pope John Paul II Opposition movements Beijing Students' Autonomous Federation Charter 77 New Forum Civic Forum Democratic Party of Albania Democratic Russia Initiative for Peace and Human Rights Sąjūdis People's Movement of Ukraine Solidarity Popular Front of Latvia Popular Front of Estonia Public Against Violence Belarusian Popular Front Rastokhez National League for Democracy National Salvation Front Union of Democratic Forces Inter-regional Deputies Group Alliance of Free Democrats Hungarian Democratic Forum Events by location Central and Eastern Europe Albania Bulgaria Czechoslovakia East Germany Hungary Poland Romania Soviet Union Yugoslavia Soviet Union Armenia Azerbaijan Belarus Chechnya Estonia Georgia Latvia Lithuania Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan Elsewhere Afghanistan Angola Benin Burma Cambodia China Congo-Brazzaville Ethiopia Mongolia Mozambique Somalia South Yemen Individual events Jeltoqsan 1987–1989 Tibetan unrest Wars in the Caucasus 1988 Polish strikes Polish Round Table Agreement April 9 tragedy Removal of Hungary's border fence with Austria Hungarian Round Table Talks Pan-European Picnic Baltic Way Monday Demonstrations Alexanderplatz demonstration Fall of the Berlin Wall Fall of the inner German border Malta Summit Black January 1990s post-Soviet aliyah Helsinki Summit Revolution on Granite Reunification of Germany January Events in Lithuania January Events in Latvia Transnistria War 1991 protests in Belgrade 1991 Belarusian strikes Dissolution of the Warsaw Pact August Coup Dissolution of the Soviet Union Tajikistani Civil War Dissolution of Czechoslovakia Later events Colour revolution Decommunization Lustration Democratization Economic liberalization Post-Soviet conflicts Neo-Sovietism Neo-Stalinism Post-communism Yugoslav Wars Pink tide Related Human rights in the Soviet Union v t e Cold War United States Soviet Union NATO Warsaw Pact ANZUS METO SEATO NEATO Rio Pact Non-Aligned Movement 1940s Morgenthau Plan Jamaican political conflict Dekemvriana Guerrilla war in the Baltic states Operation Priboi Operation Jungle Occupation of the Baltic states Cursed soldiers Operation Unthinkable Gouzenko Affair Division of Korea Chinese Civil War Chinese Communist Revolution Indonesian National Revolution Civil conflicts in Vietnam (1945–1949) Operation Beleaguer Operation Blacklist Forty Iran crisis of 1946 Greek Civil War Baruch Plan Corfu Channel incident Hukbalahap rebellion Turkish Straits crisis Restatement of Policy on Germany First Indochina War 1947 Polish parliamentary election Truman Doctrine Asian Relations Conference May 1947 crises Partition of India Indo-Pakistani war of 1947–1948 1947–1949 Palestine war 1947–1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine 1948 Arab–Israeli War 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight Marshall Plan Comecon 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état Incapacitation of the Allied Control Council Al-Wathbah uprising Tito–Stalin split Berlin Blockade Annexation of Hyderabad Madiun Affair Western betrayal Iron Curtain Eastern Bloc Western Bloc Malayan Emergency March 1949 Syrian coup d'état Operation Valuable 1950s Bamboo curtain McCarthyism First Indochina War Korean War Arab Cold War (1952–1979) 1952 Egyptian revolution Iraqi Intifada (1952) Mau Mau rebellion East German uprising of 1953 1953 Iranian coup d'état Pact of Madrid Bricker Amendment 1954 Syrian coup d'état Petrov Affair Domino theory 1954 Geneva Conference 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état Capture of the Tuapse First Taiwan Strait Crisis Jebel Akhdar War Algerian War Kashmir Princess Bandung Conference Geneva Summit (1955) Cyprus Emergency " On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences " 1956 Poznań protests Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Polish October Suez Crisis " We will bury you " Operation Gladio Syrian Crisis of 1957 Sputnik crisis Ifni War Iraqi 14 July Revolution 1958 Lebanon crisis Second Taiwan Strait Crisis 1959 Mosul uprising 1959 Tibetan uprising Kitchen Debate Cuban Revolution Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Sino-Soviet split Night Frost Crisis 1960s Congo Crisis Laotian Civil War Vietnam War Simba rebellion 1960 U-2 incident John F. Kennedy Bay of Pigs Invasion 1960 Turkish coup d'état Albanian–Soviet split Iraqi–Kurdish conflict First Iraqi–Kurdish War Berlin Crisis of 1961 Berlin Wall Annexation of Goa Papua conflict Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation Sand War Portuguese Colonial War Angolan War of Independence Guinea-Bissau War of Independence Mozambican War of Independence Cuban Missile Crisis El Porteñazo Sino-Indian War Communist insurgency in Sarawak Ramadan Revolution Eritrean War of Independence North Yemen civil war 1963 Syrian coup d'état Assassination of John F. Kennedy Lyndon B. Johnson Aden Emergency Cyprus crisis of 1963–1964 Shifta War Mexican Dirty War Tlatelolco massacre Guatemalan Civil War Colombian conflict 1964 Brazilian coup d'état Dominican Civil War Rhodesian Bush War Indonesian mass killings of 1965–1966 Transition to the New Order (Indonesia) ASEAN Declaration 1966 Syrian coup d'état Cultural Revolution Cambodian Civil War Argentine Revolution South African Border War Korean DMZ Conflict 12-3 incident Greek junta 1967 Hong Kong riots Years of Lead (Italy) Six-Day War War of Attrition Dhofar War Al-Wadiah War Nigerian Civil War Protests of 1968 May 68 Prague Spring USS Pueblo incident 1968 Polish political crisis Communist insurgency in Malaysia Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia 17 July Revolution 1968 Peruvian coup d'état Revolutionary Government 1969 Sudanese coup d'état 1969 Libyan revolution Goulash Communism Sino-Soviet border conflict New People's Army rebellion Note Crisis 1970s Détente Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Black September Alcora Exercise Corrective Movement (Syria) Western Sahara conflict Communist insurgency in Thailand 1970 Polish protests Koza riot Realpolitik Ping-pong diplomacy 1971 JVP insurrection Corrective revolution (Egypt) 1971 Turkish military memorandum 1971 Sudanese coup d'état 1971 Bolivian coup d'état Four Power Agreement on Berlin Bangladesh Liberation War 1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972 First Yemenite War Munich massacre 1972–1975 Bangladesh insurgency Eritrean Civil Wars Paris Peace Accords 1973 Uruguayan coup d'état 1973 Afghan coup d'état 1973 Chilean coup d'état Yom Kippur War 1973 oil crisis Carnation Revolution Ethiopian Civil War Vietnam War Spanish transition to democracy Metapolitefsi Strategic Arms Limitation Talks Second Iraqi–Kurdish War Turkish invasion of Cyprus 15 August 1975 Bangladeshi coup d'état Siege of Dhaka (1975) Sipahi-Janata revolution Angolan Civil War Indonesian invasion of East Timor Cambodian genocide June 1976 protests Mozambican Civil War Oromo conflict Ogaden War 1978 Somali coup attempt Western Sahara War Lebanese Civil War Sino-Albanian split Third Indochina War Cambodian–Vietnamese War Cambodian conflict Operation Condor Dirty War (Argentina) 1976 Argentine coup d'état Egyptian–Libyan War German Autumn Korean Air Lines Flight 902 Nicaraguan Revolution Uganda–Tanzania War NDF Rebellion Chadian–Libyan War Second Yemenite War Grand Mosque seizure Iranian revolution Saur Revolution Sino-Vietnamese War New Jewel Movement 1979 Herat uprising Seven Days to the River Rhine Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union 1980s Salvadoran Civil War Soviet–Afghan War Eritrean Civil Wars 1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts Gera Demands Peruvian Revolution Gdańsk Agreement Solidarity 1980 Turkish coup d'état Ugandan Bush War Gulf of Sidra incident Martial law in Poland Casamance conflict Falklands War 1982 Ethiopian–Somali Border War Ndogboyosoi War United States invasion of Grenada Able Archer 83 Star Wars 1985 Geneva Summit Iran–Iraq War Somali Rebellion Reykjavík Summit 1986 Black Sea incident South Yemen civil war Toyota War 1987 Lieyu massacre Operation Denver 1987–1989 JVP insurrection Lord's Resistance Army insurgency 1988 Black Sea bumping incident 8888 Uprising Solidarity ( Soviet reaction ) Contras Central American crisis Operation RYAN Korean Air Lines Flight 007 People Power Revolution Glasnost Perestroika Bougainville conflict First Nagorno-Karabakh War Afghan Civil War United States invasion of Panama 1988 Polish strikes Polish Round Table Agreement 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre Revolutions of 1989 Fall of the Berlin Wall Fall of the inner German border Velvet Revolution Romanian Revolution Peaceful Revolution 1990s Mongolian Revolution of 1990 Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident Gulf War Min Ping Yu No. 5202 German reunification Yemeni unification Fall of communism in Albania Breakup of Yugoslavia Dissolution of the Soviet Union 1991 August Coup Dissolution of Czechoslovakia Frozen conflicts Abkhazia China-Taiwan Korea Kosovo South Ossetia Transnistria Sino-Indian border dispute North Borneo dispute Foreign policy Truman Doctrine Containment Eisenhower Doctrine Domino theory Hallstein Doctrine Kennedy Doctrine Peaceful coexistence Ostpolitik Johnson Doctrine Brezhnev Doctrine Nixon Doctrine Ulbricht Doctrine Carter Doctrine Reagan Doctrine Paasikivi–Kekkonen doctrine Rollback Kinmen Agreement Ideologies Capitalism Liberalism Chicago school Conservatism American conservatism Keynesianism Libertarianism Monetarism Neoclassical economics Reaganomics Supply-side economics Democratic capitalism Socialism Communism Marxism–Leninism Castroism Eurocommunism Guevarism Hoxhaism Juche Ho Chi Minh Thought Maoism Trotskyism Stalinism Titoism Other Imperialism Anti-imperialism Nationalism Ultranationalism Chauvinism Ethnic nationalism Racism Zionism Anti-Zionism Fascism Neo-Nazism Islamism Totalitarianism Authoritarianism Autocracy Liberal democracy Illiberal democracy Guided democracy Social democracy Third-worldism White supremacy White nationalism White separatism Apartheid Finlandization Organizations NATO SEATO METO EEC Warsaw Pact Comecon Non-Aligned Movement NN States ASEAN SAARC Safari Club Propaganda Pro-communist Active measures Izvestia Neues Deutschland Pravda Radio Moscow Rudé právo Trybuna Ludu TASS Soviet Life Pro-Western Amerika Crusade for Freedom Paix et Liberté Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Red Scare Voice of America Technological competition Arms race Nuclear arms race Space Race Historians Gar Alperovitz Thomas A. Bailey Michael Beschloss Archie Brown Warren H. Carroll Adrian Cioroianu John Costello Michael Cox Nicholas J. Cull Norman Davies Willem Drees Robert D. English Herbert Feis Robert Hugh Ferrell André Fontaine Anneli Ute Gabanyi John Lewis Gaddis Lloyd Gardner Timothy Garton Ash Gabriel Gorodetsky Fred Halliday Jussi Hanhimäki John Earl Haynes Patrick J. Hearden Tvrtko Jakovina Tony Judt Harvey Klehr Gabriel Kolko Walter LaFeber Walter Laqueur Melvyn P. Leffler Geir Lundestad Vojtech Mastny Jack F. Matlock Jr.

Thomas J. McCormick Timothy Naftali Marius Oprea David S. Painter William B. Pickett Ronald E. Powaski Yakov M. Rabkin M. E. Sarotte Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.

Ellen Schrecker Giles Scott-Smith Shen Zhihua Timothy Snyder Athan Theoharis Andrew Thorpe Vladimir Tismăneanu Patrick Vaughan Alex von Tunzelmann Odd Arne Westad William Appleman Williams Jonathan Reed Winkler Rudolph Winnacker Ken Young Espionage and intelligence List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States Soviet espionage in the United States Russian espionage in the United States American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation CIA and the Cultural Cold War CIA MI5 MI6 United States involvement in regime change Soviet involvement in regime change MVD KGB Stasi See also Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War Soviet Union–United States relations Soviet Union–United States summits Russia–NATO relations War on terror Brinkmanship Pax Atomica Second Cold War Russian Revolution Category List of conflicts Timeline v t e Ronald Reagan 40th President of the United States (1981–1989) 33rd Governor of California (1967–1975) Life and politics Birthplace Pitney Store Boyhood home General Electric Showcase House Rancho del Cielo 668 St. Cloud Road Filmography Political positions Governorship of California Presidential Library and Museum Reagan era Official White House portraits 1989 trip to Japan Death and state funeral Riderless horse Presidency Transition First inauguration Second inauguration Domestic policy Economic policy Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 Tax Reform Act of 1986 Assassination attempt Strategic Defense Initiative Foreign policy Reagan Doctrine Cold War 1st term 2nd term Soviet Union summits Geneva Reykjavík Washington INF Treaty Moscow Governors Island Constructive engagement Invasion of Grenada Iran–Contra affair Libya bombing Cannabis policy International trips The Grace Commission Cabinet Judicial appointments Supreme Court controversies Administration scandals " We begin bombing in five minutes " Impeachment efforts Executive orders Presidential proclamations Bush transition Speeches Ronald Reagan Speaks Out Against Socialized Medicine (1961) "A Time for Choosing" (1964) Neshoba County Fair "states' rights" speech (1980) First inaugural address (1981) Joint session of Congress (1981) "Ash heap of history" (1982) "Evil empire" (1983) Second inaugural address (1985) "Tear down this wall!" (1987) State of the Union 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 Books An American Life The Reagan Diaries Elections 1966 California gubernatorial election 11th commandment 1970 California gubernatorial election Republican presidential primaries (1968 1976 1980 1984) Republican National Convention (1968 1976 1980 1984) 1976 presidential campaign 1980 presidential campaign "There you go again" "Let's make America great again" 1984 presidential campaign "Morning in America" "Bear in the woods" United States presidential election (1976 1980 1984) Cultural depictions Bibliography In music Let Them Eat Jellybeans!

(1981) U.S. Postage stamps Rap Master Ronnie Ed the Happy Clown (1983 comic series) Spitting Image (TV series) (1984) A Mind Forever Voyaging (1985 game) The Dark Knight Returns (1986) film adaptation Pizza Man (1991 film) The Day Reagan Was Shot (2001 film) Reagan's War (2002 book) The Reagans (2003 film) Reagan (2011 documentary) The Butler (2013 film) Killing Reagan (2015 book) Killing Reagan (2016 film) Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War (2020 game) The Reagans (2020 miniseries) Reagan (2024 film) Reykjavik (TBA) Memorials U.S. Capitol statue Namesakes and memorials Ronald Reagan Day Reagan Day Dinner USS Ronald Reagan Ronald Reagan Building and International Trade Center Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport Virginia statue Budapest statue Ronald Reagan Monument, Warshaw Family Jane Wyman (first wife) Nancy Reagan (second wife) Maureen Reagan (daughter) Michael Reagan (adopted son) Patti Davis (daughter) Ron Reagan (son) Jack Reagan (father) Nelle Wilson Reagan (mother) Neil Reagan (brother) Rex (dog) Related "What would Reagan do?" ← Jimmy Carter George H. W. Bush → Category v t e Foreign relations of the United States Bilateral relations Africa Central Angola Cameroon Central African Republic Chad Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Equatorial Guinea Gabon São Tomé and Príncipe East Burundi Comoros Djibouti Eritrea Ethiopia Kenya Madagascar Malawi Mauritius Mozambique Rwanda Seychelles Somalia Somaliland South Sudan Tanzania Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe North Algeria Egypt Libya Morocco Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Sudan Tunisia Southern Botswana Eswatini Lesotho Namibia South Africa West Benin Burkina Faso Cape Verde Côte d'Ivoire The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Liberia Mali Mauritania Niger Nigeria Senegal Sierra Leone Togo Americas Caribbean Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic Grenada Haiti Jamaica St. Kitts and Nevis St. Lucia St. Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago Central Belize Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Northern Canada trade South Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Asia Central Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Tajikistan Turkmenistan Uzbekistan East China Hong Kong Macau Japan Mongolia North Korea South Korea Taiwan South Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan India Maldives Nepal Pakistan military Sri Lanka Southeast Brunei Cambodia Indonesia Laos Malaysia Myanmar Philippines Singapore Thailand Timor-Leste Vietnam Western Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Georgia Iran Iraq Israel military Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Oman Palestine Qatar Saudi Arabia Syria United Arab Emirates Yemen Europe Eastern Belarus Bulgaria Czech Republic Hungary Moldova Transnistria Poland Romania Russia Slovakia Ukraine Northern Denmark Estonia Finland Iceland Ireland Latvia Lithuania Norway Sweden United Kingdom Special Relationship Bermuda Cayman Islands Southern Albania Andorra Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Cyprus Northern Cyprus Greece Holy See Italy Kosovo Malta Montenegro North Macedonia Portugal San Marino Serbia Slovenia Spain Turkey Western Austria Belgium France Germany Liechtenstein Luxembourg Monaco Netherlands Switzerland Oceania Australasia Australia New Zealand Melanesia Fiji Papua New Guinea Solomon Islands Vanuatu Micronesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru Palau Polynesia Cook Islands Samoa Tonga Tuvalu Former states Artsakh Grand Duchy of Baden Kingdom of Bavaria Duchy of Brunswick-Lüneburg Federal Republic of Central America Greater Republic of Central America Congo Free State Czechoslovakia East Germany Republic of Genoa German Empire Kingdom of Hanover Hanseatic Republics Hawaiian Kingdom Grand Duchy of Hesse Mecklenburg-Schwerin Mecklenburg-Strelitz Duchy of Nassau North German Confederation Grand Duchy of Oldenburg Orange Free State Ottoman Empire Papal States Duchy of Parma Prussia Russian Empire Ryukyu Kingdom Kingdom of Sardinia Principality of Schaumburg-Lippe Soviet Union Republic of Texas Grand Duchy of Tuscany Kingdom of the Two Sicilies United Arab Republic Kingdom of Württemberg Yugoslavia Multilateral relations Africa Arab League Asia East Asia European Union Latin America Middle East United Nations C5+1 Major non-NATO ally Third Border Initiative International organizations Doctrines, policies , concepts Presidential doctrines Proclamation of Neutrality Monroe Roosevelt Corollary Good Neighbor policy Truman Eisenhower Kennedy Johnson Nixon Carter Reagan Clinton Bush Obama Other doctrines Lodge Corollary Stimson Kirkpatrick Weinberger Powell Rumsfeld Wolfowitz Policies and concepts Blowback China policy Containment Domino theory Foreign aid Middle East policy Non-interventionism Progressive realism Rollback Special Relationship v t e Soviet Union–United States relations Diplomatic posts Embassy Washington D.C.

Soviet Ambassadors Mrs. George Pullman House Moscow US Ambassadors Spaso House Kuybyshev Consulates New York John Hammond House San Francisco Saint Petersburg Vladivostok United Nations Headquarters Representatives Russian Mission Residency Other Elmcroft Estate Killenworth Lothrop Mansion Pioneer Point Diplomacy World War II Summits Declaration of the Four Nations Lend-Lease Lend-Lease Sherman tanks Moscow Conference (1941) Moscow Conference (1942) Moscow Conference (1943) Moscow Conference (1944) Moscow Conference (1945) Potsdam Conference Council of Foreign Ministers Tehran Conference Yalta Conference Cold War Summits 1973 United States–Soviet Union wheat deal Berlin Conference (1954) Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls Council for American–Soviet Trade Dartmouth Conference Eighteen Nation Committee on Disarmament European Advisory Commission Geneva Accords (1988) Geneva Conference (1973) Geneva Summit (1955) Geneva Summit (1985) Glassboro Summit Conference Governors Island Summit Helsinki Summit (1990) Lacy-Zarubin Agreement Madrid Conference Letter Malta Summit Moscow Summit (1972) Moscow Summit (1974) Moscow Summit (1988) Mutual and Balanced Force Reductions NATO Double-Track Decision Reykjavík Summit Stalin Note State visit by Nikita Khrushchev to the United States United Nations Security Council Resolution 135 United States restitution to the Soviet Union US/USSR Acceptance of Law Governing Innocent Passage Vienna Summit Washington Summit (1987) Washington Summit (1973) Vladivostok Summit Meeting on Arms Control Policies Containment Détente Linkage Rollback Stimson Doctrine Welles Declaration Triangular diplomacy Zero Option Speeches 1989 visit by Boris Yeltsin to the United States American University speech And you are lynching Negroes Chicken Kiev speech Evil Empire speech Ich bin ein Berliner Kitchen Debate Kuzma's mother Shoe-banging incident Tear down this wall!

We will bury you Other Pushinka Soviet Military Power publication Historical Relations Russia–United States Russian Empire–United States Treaties and Agreements Arms Control 1990 Chemical Weapons Accord Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty INF McCloy–Zorin Accords Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty SALT I NTM SALT II START I Threshold Test Ban Treaty Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Space Outer Space Treaty Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes Territory Four Power Agreement on Berlin Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany USSR–USA Maritime Boundary Agreement Wanfried agreement World War II Moscow Declarations Potsdam Agreement Other Baruch Plan Bush legs Moscow–Washington hotline U.S.–Soviet Incidents at Sea agreement Legislation Executive Order 8484 Former Soviet Union Demilitarization Act of 1992 FRIENDSHIP Act of 1993 Jackson–Vanik amendment Russian Famine Relief Act Soviet Nuclear Threat Reduction Act of 1991 Science Space APAS Apollo–Soyuz Bion satellites Kosmos 782 Kosmos 936 Kosmos 1129 Kosmos 1514 Kosmos 1667 Kosmos 1887 Kosmos 2044 International Cospas-Sarsat Programme Mir SAGE Space Race TOPAZ-I U.S.–Soviet Space Bridge Yardymly Other International Conference of Laser Applications Shvetsov M-25 Uzel Culture Chess US vs. USSR radio chess match 1945 World Chess Championship 1972 Bobby Fischer Education Anglo-American School of Moscow St. Petersburg Russian Cultural Center Russian Embassy School in Washington, D.C.

Russian Mission School in New York Literature Amerika (magazine) Deep Black Eagles East International Publishers Russian Life Sovfoto The Admiral's Daughter Who's Who in the CIA X Article Radio / Music Ordinary People Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Red Wave Sports 1972 Olympic men's basketball final 1976 Philadelphia Flyers–Red Army game Glasnost Bowl Goodwill Games Miracle on Ice Super Series USA–USSR Track and Field Dual Meet Series TV / Film Free to Be... a Family Soviet submissions for the Academy Award for Best International Feature Film Stalingrad The Extraordinary Adventures of Mr. West in the Land of the Bolsheviks Other American National Exhibition Apollo-Soyuz (cigarette) In Soviet Georgia Soviet Interview Project White Coke Cold War Overview Origins Timeline 1947–1948 1948–1953 1953–1962 1962–1979 1979–1985 1985–1991 Nuclear arms race Space Race Timeline Espionage Americans Soviets Atomic spies Cold War in Asia Operations Operation Anadyr Operation Breakthrough Operation Cedar Operation Chrome Dome Operation Cyclone Operation Denver Operation Dropshot Operation Giant Lance Operation Gold Operation Ivy Bells Operation Keelhaul Operation Lincoln Operation Monopoly Operation RYAN Operation Safe Haven (1957) Operation Shocker Operation Sunrise Projects Project Azorian Project Coldfeet Project Dark Gene Project Genetrix Project Grab Bag Project HOMERUN Project Hula Project Moby Dick Project Mogul Venona project Other 7th Air Escadrille Active Measures Working Group Bomber gap CIA activities in the Soviet Union Cold War tensions and the polio vaccine GIUK gap Missile gap Nitrophenyl pentadienal NSC 68 Plan Totality Red Scare Seven Days to the River Rhine Sheldon names Smolensk Archive SDI The Moscow rules United States aerial reconnaissance of the Soviet Union United States war plans (1945–1950) U.S. Army Field Manual 30-31B Incidents World War II Gorin v. United States Niš incident Cold War 1958 C-130 shootdown incident 1960 RB-47 shootdown incident 1960 U-2 incident 1961 F-84 Thunderstreak incident 1964 T-39 shootdown incident 1980 Summer Olympics boycott 1983 Soviet nuclear false alarm incident 1984 Summer Olympics boycott 1986 Black Sea incident 1988 Black Sea bumping incident Able Archer 83 Autumn Forge 83 Aeroflot Flight 244 Air-to-air combat losses between the Soviet Union and the United States Arrest of Mark Kaminsky and Harvey Bennett Arthur D. Nicholson Berlin Blockade Berlin Crisis of 1958–1959 Berlin Crisis of 1961 Capture of the Tuapse Cuban Missile Crisis Crateology Dymshits–Kuznetsov hijacking affair Feodor Fedorenko Gambell incident Hollow Nickel Case Iran crisis of 1946 John Anthony Walker Karl Linnas Kasenkina Case Korean Air Lines Flight 007 Martin and Mitchell defection Moscow Signal Pan Am Flight 708 Seaboard World Airlines Flight 253A Shostakovich v. Twentieth Century-Fox Film Corp.

Siberian Seven Soviet submarine K-129 Soviet submarine K-219 Sputnik crisis SS Metallurg Anosov Transfermium Wars Turkish Straits crisis United States grain embargo against the Soviet Union Urengoy–Pomary–Uzhhorod pipeline We begin bombing in five minutes Yellow rain Yeniseysk-15 Military relations Russian Revolution American Expeditionary Force, North Russia American Expeditionary Force, Siberia North Russia intervention Siberian intervention United States and the Russian Revolution White movement World War II Allied Control Council Allied Kommandatura Allied technological cooperation during World War II ALSIB Arctic convoys of World War II Belorussia-class cargo ship Berlin Victory Parade of 1945 Elbe Day Four Policemen Line of Contact Northwest Staging Route Pacific Route Persian Corridor Persian Gulf Command SS Dakotan SS Iowan Tripartite Naval Commission USS West Bridge Warsaw airlift Cold War Eisenhower Doctrine Four Power Naval Commission Four-Power Authorities Military liaison missions Reagan Doctrine Truman Doctrine Armaments AG submarines Bell P-63 Kingcobra Comparison of the AK-47 and M16 SS Indigirka Tupolev Tu-4 Tupolev Tu-70 Tupolev Tu-80 USCGC Southwind Organizations Soviet Union Amtorg Trading Corporation Ansonia Clock Company Foundation for Social Inventions Gennady Alferenko Institute for US and Canadian Studies Russian Soviet Government Bureau Soviet Government Purchasing Commission in the U.S.

United States American Committee for the Liberation of the Peoples of Russia Ark Project American Peace Mobilization American Relief Administration American Russian Institute American–Soviet friendship movement American-Soviet Peace Walks Center for Citizen Initiatives Communist Party USA Dewey Commission Freedom Sunday for Soviet Jews Friends of Soviet Russia Friendship Flight '89 Friendship Flight (Alaska Airlines) Fund for Armenian Relief Kennan Institute Kersten Committee National Committee for a Free Europe National Council of American–Soviet Friendship Organization for Jewish Colonization in Russia Russian-American Industrial Corporation Russian War Relief Society for Technical Aid to Soviet Russia Student Struggle for Soviet Jewry U.S. Commission on the Ukraine Famine U.S. Peace Council Related Baltic Freedom Day Captive Nations Captive Nations Week GAZ Georgi Bolshakov Little Joe New world order (politics) Refusenik Roswell Garst Samantha Smith Self-propelled barge T-36 Sisson Documents Sovereignty of Puerto Rico during the Cold War Suzanne Massie Category:Soviet Union–United States relations Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reagan_Doctrine&oldid=1305965701 " Categories : 20th-century conflicts 20th century in international relations Anti-communism in the United States Central Intelligence Agency Dissolution of the Soviet Union Cold War history of the United States Foreign policy doctrines of the United States Guerrilla warfare 1985 in the United States History of the foreign relations of the United States Military doctrines Presidency of Ronald Reagan Soviet Union–United States relations United States intelligence operations United States national security policy Political terminology of the United States Eponymous political ideologies Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template archiveis links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 03:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Reagan Doctrine 30 languages Add topic

