Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Particulars Toggle Particulars subsection 1.1 Application 2 Non-developable surface Toggle Non-developable surface subsection 2.1 Applications of non-developable surfaces 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Developable surface 15 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti Español Français 한국어 עברית Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Русский Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Surface able to be flattened without distortion The cylinder is an example of a developable surface.

In mathematics , a developable surface (or torse : archaic) is a smooth surface with zero Gaussian curvature .  That is, it is a surface that can be flattened onto a plane without distortion (i.e. it can be bent without stretching or compression).  Conversely, it is a surface which can be made by transforming a plane (i.e. "folding", "bending", "rolling", "cutting" and/or "gluing"). Because of these properties, developable surfaces are widely used in the design and fabrication of items to be made from sheet materials, ranging from textiles to sheet metal such as ductwork to shipbuilding .

[ 1 ] In three dimensions all developable surfaces are ruled surfaces (but not vice versa). There are developable surfaces in four-dimensional space ⁠ R 4 {\displaystyle \mathbb {R} ^{4}} ⁠ which are not ruled.

[ 2 ] The envelope of a single parameter family of planes is called a developable surface.

Particulars [ edit ] The developable surfaces which can be realized in three-dimensional space include: Cylinders and, more generally, the "generalized" cylinder; its cross-section may be any smooth curve Cones and, more generally, conical surfaces ; away from the apex The oloid and the sphericon are members of a special family of solids that develop their entire surface when rolling down a flat plane.

Planes (trivially); which may be viewed as a cylinder whose cross-section is a line Tangent developable surfaces; which are constructed by extending the tangent lines of a spatial curve.

The torus has a metric under which it is developable, which can be embedded into three-dimensional space by the Nash embedding theorem [ 3 ] and has a simple representation in four dimensions as the Cartesian product of two circles: see Clifford torus .

Formally, in mathematics, a developable surface is a surface with zero Gaussian curvature .  One consequence of this is that all "developable" surfaces embedded in 3D-space are ruled surfaces (though hyperboloids are examples of ruled surfaces which are not developable).  Because of this, many developable surfaces can be visualised as the surface formed by moving a straight line in space.  For example, a cone is formed by keeping one end-point of a line fixed whilst moving the other end-point in a circle .

Application [ edit ] Comparison of tangent and secant cylindrical, conic and azimuthal map projections with standard parallels shown in red Developable surfaces have several practical applications.

Many cartographic projections involve projecting the Earth to a developable surface and then "unrolling" the surface into a region on the plane.

Since developable surfaces may be constructed by bending a flat sheet, they are also important in manufacturing objects from sheet metal, cardboard , and plywood . An industry which uses developed surfaces extensively is shipbuilding.

[ 4 ] Developable Mechanisms are mechanisms that conform to a developable surface and can exhibit motion (deploy) off the surface.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Non-developable surface [ edit ] Most smooth surfaces (and most surfaces in general) are not developable surfaces.

Non-developable surfaces are variously referred to as having " double curvature ", " doubly curved ", " compound curvature ", " non-zero Gaussian curvature ", etc.

Some of the most often-used non-developable surfaces are: Spheres are not developable surfaces under any metric as they cannot be unrolled onto a plane.

The helicoid is a ruled surface – but unlike the ruled surfaces mentioned above, it is not a developable surface.

The hyperbolic paraboloid and the hyperboloid are slightly different doubly ruled surfaces – but unlike the ruled surfaces mentioned above, neither one is a developable surface.

Applications of non-developable surfaces [ edit ] Many gridshells and tensile structures and similar constructions gain strength by using (any) doubly curved form.

See also [ edit ] Development (differential geometry) Developable roller References [ edit ] ^ Chalfant, Julie S.; Maekawa, Takashi (September 1998). "Design for Manufacturing Using B-Spline Developable Surfaces".

Journal of Ship Research .

42 (3): 207– 215.

doi : 10.5957/jsr.1998.42.3.207 .

^ Hilbert, David ; Cohn-Vossen, Stephan (1952), Geometry and the Imagination (2nd ed.), New York: Chelsea, pp.

341– 342, ISBN 978-0-8284-1087-8 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Borrelli, V.; Jabrane, S.; Lazarus, F.; Thibert, B. (April 2012), "Flat tori in three-dimensional space and convex integration", Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 109 (19): 7218– 7223, doi : 10.1073/pnas.1118478109 , PMC 3358891 , PMID 22523238 .

^ Nolan, T. J. (1970), Computer-Aided Design of Developable Hull Surfaces , Ann Arbor: University Microfilms International ^ "Developable Mechanisms | About Developable Mechanisms" .

compliantmechanisms . Retrieved 2019-02-14 .

^ Howell, Larry L.; Lang, Robert J.; Magleby, Spencer P.; Zimmerman, Trent K.; Nelson, Todd G. (2019-02-13).

"Developable mechanisms on developable surfaces" .

Science Robotics .

4 (27): eaau5171.

doi : 10.1126/scirobotics.aau5171 .

ISSN 2470-9476 .

PMID 33137737 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Developable surfaces .

Weisstein, Eric W.

"Developable Surface" .

MathWorld .

Examples of developable surfaces on the Rhino3DE website Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Developable_surface&oldid=1293782602 " Categories : Surfaces Differential geometry Differential geometry of surfaces Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 17:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Developable surface 15 languages Add topic

