Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mechanism 2 Chemicals 3 Effects 4 Climate change 5 Mitigation techniques 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Global distillation 8 languages العربية বাংলা Italiano ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Português Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Movement of pollutant chemicals You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Portuguese .

(March 2013) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the Portuguese article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 560 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Portuguese Wikipedia article at [[:pt:Destilação global]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|pt|Destilação global}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Part of a series on Pollution Air pollution from a factory Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Global distillation , also known as the Grasshopper effect , is the geochemical process by which certain chemicals, most notably persistent organic pollutants (POPs), are vaporized and transported from warmer to colder regions of the Earth , particularly the poles and mountain tops, where they condense. Other chemicals include acidifying acids (SO x ) and heavy metals.

[ 1 ] The first documented use of the term was in 1975 by E.D. Goldberg to describe the vaporization of synthetic halogenated hydrocarbons which is enhanced by the presence of water.

[ 2 ] However, this effect was only believed to occur within a defined “pollution band” in the mid-latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere. Soon after, evidence of this effect was found in arctic food as well as its atmosphere.

[ 3 ] Since then, relatively high concentrations of POPs have been found in the Arctic soil and water, as well as the bodies of animals and people who live there, even though most of the chemicals have not been used in the region in appreciable amounts.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Mechanism [ edit ] Apparatus used for distillation in chemistry The global distillation process can be understood using the same principles that explain distillations used to make liquor or purify chemicals in a laboratory.

[ 6 ] In these processes, a substance is vaporized at a relatively high temperature, and then the vapor travels to an area of lower temperature where it condenses. A similar phenomenon occurs on a global scale for certain chemicals. When these chemicals are released into the environment , some evaporate when ambient temperatures are warm and blow around on winds until temperatures are cooler, when condensation occurs. Drops in temperature large enough to result in deposition can occur when chemicals are blown from warmer to cooler climates, or when seasons change. The net effect is atmospheric transport from low to high latitude and altitude . Since global distillation is a relatively slow process that relies on successive evaporation/condensation cycles, it is only effective for semi-volatile chemicals that break down very slowly in the environment, like DDT , polychlorinated biphenyls , and lindane .

Chemicals [ edit ] POPs are known for their resistance to degradation and their toxicity to humans and wildlife.

[ 7 ] Although most are now banned, their long-lasting capabilities have allowed them to remain in the atmosphere, soil, and water, where vaporization can occur.

[ 6 ] Two of the most common POPs that participate in global distillation are dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).

[ 6 ] DDT, once used as an insecticide , is now known to contribute to obesity and hypertension , and is a possible carcinogen. PCBs, on the other hand, can cause developmental effects in children and babies. Both chemicals are also endocrine disruptors , which involve bodily hormones. However, in 2004, the Stockholm Convention pledged to reduce or eliminate POP usage due to their negative effects.

[ 8 ] Effects [ edit ] Global distillation has a profound impact on the ocean, primarily through the long-range transport of toxic chemicals that accumulate in marine ecosystems.

[ 9 ] Once in the ocean, these pollutants can be absorbed by marine organisms and enter the food chain, affecting everything from plankton to large marine mammals.

[ 6 ] Chemicals can accumulate in the fatty tissues of fish and other sea creatures, leading to toxic concentrations that can disrupt the health of marine ecosystems.

[ 1 ] This contamination jeopardizes marine biodiversity and affects fisheries, which many coastal communities rely on for sustenance and livelihoods.

Animals in polar areas are at high risk because they often rely on fat-rich diets, which increase their exposure to accumulated toxic chemicals. Species like polar bears, seals, and whales, which are top predators, accumulate high levels of POPs due to biomagnification —where these pollutants become more concentrated as they move up the food chain.

[ 9 ] [ 6 ] These chemicals can lead to  developmental abnormalities in wildlife, threatening population sustainability . Additionally, migratory species, such as birds and marine mammals, can carry these pollutants over vast distances, spreading contamination far beyond their point of origin.

[ 1 ] The toxic buildup in these species not only affects their health and survival rates but also disrupts the broader ecological balance of these fragile environments.

Global distillation also has significant consequences for human health, particularly in indigenous and remote communities that rely on traditional diets, such as fatty fish and marine mammals.

[ 10 ] Global distillation can cause social inequalities, as poleward communities such as the Inuit receive the most direct affects.

[ 1 ] As these chemicals accumulate in the environment, there is also the risk of them entering water supplies, which further amplifies the potential for human exposure. In this way, global distillation poses a significant threat not only to the environment but also to the long-term health and well-being of vulnerable populations around the world.

Climate change [ edit ] This process is closely linked to climate change . As global temperatures continue to rise, chemicals are more readily volatilized, further increasing atmospheric pollution .

[ 11 ] The Arctic warms at a faster rate, amplifying this effect. Ice is a known storage location for POPs and other chemicals, and when it melts, pollutants risk redistribution through ocean currents.

[ 12 ] [ 11 ] Changes in weather patterns are another effect of climate change, which may also alter the pathways through which chemicals are transported.

[ 11 ] If they find their way into the water supply, toxic substances can pose a threat to ecosystems and human health.

[ 10 ] Global distillation and climate change create a positive feedback loop that worsens environmental degradation, making it harder to mitigate the harmful impacts on biodiversity and human well-being.

Mitigation techniques [ edit ] Mitigation techniques for global distillation focus on reducing the release of POPs and enhancing the detection and removal of these substances from the environment. One major advancement is the development of cleaner industrial processes that minimize the production of hazardous chemicals, particularly through improved manufacturing practices and alternative chemicals. For example, the use of non-toxic alternatives in pesticides , solvents, and industrial chemicals can greatly reduce the risk of these substances entering the atmosphere. Additionally, advancements in air filtration technologies, such as high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters and activated carbon systems, can help capture airborne pollutants before they spread into the atmosphere or settle in colder regions. Reduction of fatty acids in the diet may help to reduce human contamination.

[ 8 ] Moreover, satellite and remote sensing technologies enable better tracking of the movement and deposition of POPs, providing valuable data to inform mitigation strategies.

[ 7 ] By investing in innovative clean technologies and improving pollutant tracking systems, it is possible to reduce the long-range transport of harmful chemicals and limit their environmental impact.

There is also the possibility for policy implementation, which primarily focuses on the creation of international agreements and regulatory frameworks aimed at reducing the production and use of POPs. A key example is the Stockholm Convention , a global treaty that seeks to eliminate or restrict the use of the most dangerous chemicals, including many involved in global distillation.

[ 8 ] By enforcing stricter regulations on the manufacturing and disposal of these substances, countries can collectively work to reduce the chemicals released into the atmosphere and, subsequently, their transport to polar regions.

[ 7 ] On a regional level, cross-border collaborations between countries in areas like the Arctic are essential to monitor and address the movement of pollutants.

See also [ edit ] Air pollution Health effects of pesticides Solvent Stockholm Convention References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Bard, Shannon Mala (1999-05-01).

"Global Transport of Anthropogenic Contaminants and the Consequences for the Arctic Marine Ecosystem" .

Marine Pollution Bulletin .

38 (5): 356– 379.

Bibcode : 1999MarPB..38..356B .

doi : 10.1016/S0025-326X(99)00041-7 .

ISSN 0025-326X .

^ Goldberg, E. D.; Bournaud, R.; Boucher, E. A.; Preston, A.; Cole, H. A.; Smith, James Eric (January 1997).

"Synthetic organohalides in the sea" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B. Biological Sciences .

189 (1096): 277– 289.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.1975.0057 .

PMID 238197 .

^ Ottar, Brynjulf (1980-11-04). "The transfer of airborne pollutants to the Arctic region".

Atmospheric Environment .

15 (8): 1439– 1445.

doi : 10.1016/0004-6981(81)90350-4 .

^ Long, Manhai; Sonne, Christian; Dietz, Rune; Bossi, Rossana; Jørgensen, Najannguaq; Olsen, Taatsiannguaq Inuuteq; Bonefeld-Jørgensen, Eva Cecilie (2023-12-01).

"Diet, lifestyle and contaminants in three east Greenland Inuit municipalities" .

Chemosphere .

344 : 140368.

Bibcode : 2023Chmsp.34440368L .

doi : 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2023.140368 .

ISSN 0045-6535 .

PMID 37802483 .

^ "Ridding the world of POPs: A guide to the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants" (PDF) .

United Nations Environment Programme . April 2005 . Retrieved 2008-06-06 .

^ a b c d e "Chapter 1. Global Distillation: The Fate and Transport of Toxic Chemicals into the Arctic" (PDF) . December 2, 2014.

^ a b c Puzyn, Tomasz; Mostrag, Aleksandra (2012-02-24).

Organic Pollutants Ten Years After the Stockholm Convention: Environmental and Analytical Update . BoD – Books on Demand.

ISBN 978-953-307-917-2 .

^ a b c Northern Lights against POPs: Combatting Toxic Threats in the Arctic . McGill-Queen's University Press. 2003.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctt801rz .

ISBN 978-0-7735-2482-8 .

JSTOR j.ctt801rz .

^ a b "AMAP Assessment 2018: Biological Effects of Contaminants on Arctic Wildlife and Fish" . December 2, 2024 . Retrieved December 2, 2024 .

^ a b Long, Manhai; Sonne, Christian; Dietz, Rune; Bossi, Rossana; Jørgensen, Najannguaq; Olsen, Taatsiannguaq Inuuteq; Bonefeld-Jørgensen, Eva Cecilie (2023-12-01).

"Diet, lifestyle and contaminants in three east Greenland Inuit municipalities" .

Chemosphere .

344 : 140368.

Bibcode : 2023Chmsp.34440368L .

doi : 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2023.140368 .

ISSN 0045-6535 .

PMID 37802483 .

^ a b c Sadler, Ross; Connell, Des (2012-02-24), Puzyn, Tomasz (ed.), "Global Distillation in an Era of Climate Change" , Organic Pollutants Ten Years After the Stockholm Convention - Environmental and Analytical Update , InTech, doi : 10.5772/38761 , hdl : 10072/50288 , ISBN 978-953-307-917-2 , retrieved 2024-12-09 ^ Bard, Shannon Mala (1999-05-01).

"Global Transport of Anthropogenic Contaminants and the Consequences for the Arctic Marine Ecosystem" .

Marine Pollution Bulletin .

38 (5): 356– 379.

Bibcode : 1999MarPB..38..356B .

doi : 10.1016/S0025-326X(99)00041-7 .

ISSN 0025-326X .

Further reading [ edit ] Cone, Marla (2006).

Silent Snow: The Slow Poisoning of The Arctic . Grove Press.

ISBN 0-8021-4259-1 .

External links [ edit ] The Grasshopper Effect and Tracking Hazardous Air Pollutants , Environment Canada.

v t e Pollution History Air Acid rain Air quality index Air pollution measurement Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Biofuel Biomass Coal Joss paper Open burning of waste Construction Renovation Demolition Exhaust gas Diesel exhaust Haze Smoke Indoor air quality Internal combustion engine Global dimming Global distillation Mining Ozone depletion Particulates Asbestos Oil refining Polluting cooking fuels Persistent organic pollutant Smelting Smog Soot Black carbon Volatile organic compound Waste Biological Biological hazard Genetic pollution Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information pollution Electromagnetic Light Ecological light pollution Overillumination Radio spectrum pollution Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Land Water Air Rail Sustainable transport Urban Sonar Marine mammals and sonar Industrial Military Abstract Noise control Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Electromagnetic radiation and health Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural pollution Herbicides Manure waste Pesticides Land degradation Bioremediation Open defecation Electrical resistance heating Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Battery recycling Foam food container Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Biomedical waste Chemical waste Construction waste Lead poisoning Mercury poisoning Toxic waste Industrial waste Lead smelting Litter Mining Coal mining Gold mining Surface mining Deep sea mining Mining waste Uranium mining Municipal solid waste Garbage Nanomaterials Plastic pollution Microplastics Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Landfill Thermal treatment Space Satellite Visual Air travel Clutter (advertising) Traffic signs Overhead power lines Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare ( Agent Orange ) Nuclear holocaust ( Nuclear fallout - nuclear famine - nuclear winter ) Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biological pollution Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine debris Monitoring Nonpoint source pollution Nutrient pollution Ocean acidification Oil exploitation Oil exploration Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Sewage Septic tanks Pit latrine Shipping Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Thermal Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Topics Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Brain health and pollution Misc Area source Debris Dust Garbology Legacy pollution Midden Point source Waste Responses Cleaner production Industrial ecology Pollution haven hypothesis Pollutant release and transfer register Polluter pays principle Pollution control Waste minimisation Zero waste Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM 2.5 Most polluted countries Most polluted rivers Treaties Categories ( by country ) Commons WikiProject Environment WikiProject Ecology Environment portal Ecology portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Global_distillation&oldid=1305283895 " Categories : Air pollution Environmental effects of pesticides Environment of the Arctic Global environmental issues Pollution Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing translation from Portuguese Wikipedia Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 04:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Global distillation 8 languages Add topic

