Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Family relationships 3 Apologetics Toggle Apologetics subsection 3.1 Influence of Rushdoony 4 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 4.1 Institute of Church Leadership 4.2 Seven Mountain Mandate 4.3 Political activism 4.4 A Christian Manifesto 4.5 Influence on Christian conservatives 5 Writings 6 Films 7 Notes Toggle Notes subsection 7.1 Cited sources 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Francis Schaeffer 15 languages العربية Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Čeština Deutsch Français 한국어 Íslenska مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American theologian (1912-1984) The Reverend Francis Schaeffer Founder of the L'Abri community Born Francis August Schaeffer ( 1912-01-30 ) January 30, 1912 Germantown, Pennsylvania , U.S.

Died May 15, 1984 (1984-05-15) (aged 72) Rochester, Minnesota , U.S.

Occupation(s) Christian philosopher, Evangelical church leader, author Spouse Edith Seville Schaeffer Children 4, including Frank Schaeffer Ordination BPC (1938-1956) EPC (1956-1965) RPCES (1965-1982) PCA (1982-1984) Signature This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Francis August Schaeffer (January 30, 1912 – May 15, 1984) [ 1 ] was an American evangelical theologian , philosopher , and Presbyterian pastor . He co-founded the L'Abri community in Switzerland with his wife Edith Schaeffer , née Seville , a prolific author in her own right.

[ 2 ] Opposed to theological modernism (which prefers, e.g., rationalism and religious experience over following religious traditions based on revelation ), Schaeffer promoted what he claimed was a more historic Protestant faith and a presuppositional approach to Christian apologetics , which he believed would answer the questions of the age.

Schaeffer distinguished between the terms rationalism and rational : "Humanism in the larger, more inclusive sense is the system whereby men and women, beginning absolutely by themselves, try rationally to build out from themselves, having only Man as their integration point, to find all knowledge, meaning and value.  We must also ensure that the word rationalism , which means the same thing as humanism in the wider sense, is not confused with the word rational .

Rational means that the things which are about us are not contrary to reason; or, to put it another way, man's aspiration of reason is valid.  And so the Judeo-Christian position is rational, but it is the very antithesis of rationalism." [ 3 ] Biography [ edit ] Schaeffer was born on January 30, 1912, in Germantown, Pennsylvania , to Franz A. Schaeffer III and Bessie Williamson.

[ 4 ] He was of German and English ancestry.

[ 5 ] In 1935, Schaeffer graduated magna cum laude from Hampden–Sydney College . The same year he married Edith Seville, the daughter of missionary parents who had been with the China Inland Mission founded by Hudson Taylor . Schaeffer then enrolled at Westminster Theological Seminary in the fall and studied under Cornelius Van Til ( presuppositional apologetics ) and J. Gresham Machen ( doctrine of inerrancy ).

[ 6 ] In 1937, Schaeffer transferred to Faith Theological Seminary , graduating in 1938.  This seminary was newly formed as a result of a split between the Presbyterian Church of America, now the Orthodox Presbyterian Church , and the Bible Presbyterian Church , a Presbyterian denomination more identified with Fundamentalist Christianity and premillennialism . Schaeffer was the first student to graduate and the first to be ordained in the Bible Presbyterian Church. He served pastorates in Pennsylvania ( Grove City and Chester ) and St. Louis, Missouri .

Schaeffer eventually sided with the Bible Presbyterian Church Columbus Synod following the BPC Collingswood and BPC Columbus split in 1956. BPC Columbus reorganized as the Evangelical Presbyterian Church in 1961, and Schaeffer followed the EPC into the Reformed Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod when the Bible Presbyterian Church's Columbus Synod merged with the Reformed Presbyterian Church, General Synod in 1965, [ 7 ] a denomination which would merge with the Presbyterian Church in America , in 1982.

In 1948, the Schaeffer family moved to Switzerland and in 1955 established the community called L'Abri (French for ' the shelter ' ).

[ 1 ] [ 8 ] Serving as both a philosophy seminar and a spiritual community, L'Abri attracted thousands of young people, and was later expanded into Sweden, France, the Netherlands, Canada, the United Kingdom and the United States.

Schaeffer received numerous honorary degrees.  In 1954, he was awarded an honorary Doctor of Divinity degree from Highland College in Long Beach, California .

[ 9 ] In 1971, he received an honorary Doctor of Letters degree from Gordon College in Wenham, Massachusetts .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] In 1982, John Warwick Montgomery nominated Schaeffer for an honorary Doctor of Laws degree, which was conferred in 1983 by the Simon Greenleaf School of Law , Anaheim, California in recognition of his apologetic writings and ministry.

[ 12 ] Schaeffer died of lymphoma on May 15, 1984, in Rochester, Minnesota .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] He opened a L'Abri branch there before his death. Schaeffer Academy, a private K-12 school in Rochester, is named after him.

[ 15 ] Family relationships [ edit ] In Crazy for God , Schaeffer's son Frank presents a portrait of his father that is far more nuanced and multi-dimensional than was suggested by his public persona. He states, for example, that Schaeffer's primary passions in life were not the Bible and theology but rather art and culture. "And what moved him was not theology but beauty".

[ 16 ] Schaeffer's son claims he had frequent bouts with depression and a verbally and physically abusive relationship with his wife, Edith.

[ 9 ] Those in the inner circle at L'Abri challenge Frank's account.

Os Guinness , who lived with the Schaeffers and was a close friend of both the younger and elder Schaeffer, described Crazy for God as a "scurrilous caricature" and said, "[N]o one should take Frank's allegations at face value." [ 17 ] Frank Schaeffer initially supported his father's ideas and political program, but has since distanced himself from many of those views, first converting to the Eastern Orthodox Church [ 18 ] and later becoming a liberal and a self-described " atheist who believes in God." [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Apologetics [ edit ] Schaeffer's approach to Christian apologetics was primarily influenced by Herman Dooyeweerd , [ failed verification ] Edward John Carnell , and Cornelius Van Til , but he was not known to be a strict presuppositionalist in the Van Tillian tradition. His approach to culture was heavily influenced by his friendship with Hans Rookmaaker . In a 1948 article in The Bible Today , Schaeffer explained his own apologetics and how he walked a middle path between evidentialism and presuppositionalism, noting that "If the unsaved man was consistent he would be an atheist in religion, an irrationalist in philosophy (including a complete uncertainty concerning 'natural laws'), and completely a-moral in the widest sense." [ 21 ] J. Budziszewski summarizes the article about this middle path approach by writing: Presuppositionalists, he held, are right to assert that the ultimate premises of Christian and anti–Christian systems of thought are utterly at odds in relation to their origin. On the other hand, evidentialists are right to assert that between Christian and anti–Christian systems of thought there is always a point of contact in the shape of reality itself. The reason for this point of contact, he argued, is that nonbelievers cannot bring themselves to be completely consistent with their own presuppositions, and this inconsistency is a result of what many call common grace and is in fact the reality of God having made, and spoken into, a defined and unavoidable creation.  "Thus, illogically", he wrote, "men have in their accepted worldviews various amounts of that which is ours.  But, illogical though it may be, it is there and we can appeal to it." [ 22 ] Schaeffer came to use this middle path as the basis for his method of evangelism which he called "Taking the roof off".

[ 23 ] An example of Taking the roof off in written form can be found in Schaeffer's work entitled Death in the City.

[ 24 ] Nancy Pearcey also describes two books by Schaeffer, Escape From Reason and The God Who Is There in this way: In these books, Schaeffer explains the history of the two-story division of knowledge, often referred to as the fact/value split. He also describes his apologetics method, which combined elements of both evidentialism and presuppositionalism.

[ 25 ] Influence of Rushdoony [ edit ] In the 1960s Schaeffer read the works of Reconstructionist theologian Rousas John Rushdoony with appreciation, and according to Barry Hankins, "it is quite likely that Schaeffer's belief that the United States was founded on a Christian base came in part from Rushdoony." [ 4 ] Schaeffer later lost this fervor because Rushdoony was a postmillennialist , holding the doctrine that the kingdom of God will be built on earth before the second coming of Jesus, while Schaeffer was a premillennialist , holding that the kingdom of God will only be ushered in with the second coming.

[ 4 ] Schaeffer thought that Rushdoony's system would require a merger of church and state, which he opposed. He held that the principles, not the actual details, of Old Testament civil law were applicable under the New Covenant of Jesus. He wrote "The moral law [of the Old Testament], of course, is constant, but the civil law only was operative for the Old Testament theocracy. I do not think there is any indication of a theocracy in the New Testament until Christ returns as king." [ 4 ] Legacy [ edit ] This section relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this section by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Francis Schaeffer" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Schaeffer in Urbana, Illinois , 1981 The Francis A. Schaeffer Foundation in Gryon , Switzerland is led by one of his daughters and sons-in-law as a small-scale alternative to the original L'Abri Fellowship International, which is still operating in nearby Huemoz-sur-Ollon and other places in the world.

Covenant Theological Seminary has established the Francis A. Schaeffer Institute directed by a former English L'Abri member, Jerram Barrs. The purpose of the school is to train Christians to demonstrate compassionately and defend reasonably what they see as the claims of Christ on all of life.

[ 26 ] According to Michael Hamilton of Christianity Today , "Perhaps no intellectual save C. S. Lewis affected the thinking of evangelicals more profoundly [than Francis Schaeffer]; perhaps no leader of the period save Billy Graham left a deeper stamp on the movement as a whole." [ 27 ] Institute of Church Leadership [ edit ] In 1978, Schaeffer asked a group of Reformed Episcopal Clergy to research his thoughts and current trends, forming a church guild called "The Society of Reformed Philosophical Thinkers". This was merged in 1988 with "Into Thy Word Ministries", which was then transformed into "The Francis A. Schaeffer Institute of Church Leadership Development" in 1998. Its purpose is to strategize how to reach and train pastors and church leaders to focus on Christ centered principles. Its aim is to point the church back to "true-Truth" and "true spirituality". The foundation develops comprehensive curriculum for pastors, church planters and church leaders.

[ citation needed ] Seven Mountain Mandate [ edit ] In 1975, along with fellow evangelists Bill Bright (founder of Campus Crusade for Christ ) and Loren Cunningham (founder of Youth With a Mission ), Schaeffer was one of the founders of what would later be termed the Seven Mountain Mandate . The idea would later go on to be popularized by Bethel Church pastor Bill Johnson and Lance Wallnau , among others. The concept centers around Christians taking dominion of seven societal spheres of influence : "family, religion, education, media, art, economics, and government." [ 28 ] [ 29 ] Political activism [ edit ] Francis Schaeffer is credited with helping spark a return to political activism among Protestant evangelicals and fundamentalists in the late 1970s and early 1980s, especially in relation to the issue of abortion .

[ 30 ] In his memoir Crazy for God, Schaeffer's son Frank takes credit for pressing his father to take on the abortion issue, which Schaeffer initially considered "too political".

[ 9 ] Schaeffer called for a challenge to what he saw as the increasing influence of secular humanism. Schaeffer's views were expressed in two works, his book entitled A Christian Manifesto , as well as the book and film series, Whatever Happened to the Human Race?

.

[ citation needed ] A Christian Manifesto [ edit ] Schaeffer's book A Christian Manifesto [ 31 ] was published in 1981 and later delivered as a sermon in 1982.  It was intended as a Christian answer to The Communist Manifesto of 1848 and the Humanist Manifesto documents of 1933 and 1973. Schaeffer's diagnosis is that the decline of Western Civilization is due to society having become increasingly pluralistic , resulting in a shift "away from a world view that was at least vaguely Christian in people's memory… toward something completely different." [ citation needed ] Schaeffer argues that there is a philosophical struggle between the people of God and the secular humanists.

[ improper synthesis?

] In the sermon version of the book, Schaeffer defines secular humanism as the worldview where "man is the measure of all things".

[ citation needed ] He claims that critics of the Christian right miss the mark by confusing the "humanist religion" with humanitarianism, the humanities, or love of humans.  He describes the conflict with secular humanism as a battle in which "these two religions, Christianity and humanism, stand over against each other as totalities." [ citation needed ] He writes that the decline of commitment to objective truth that he perceives in the various institutions of society is "not because of a conspiracy, but because the church has forsaken its duty to be the salt of the culture." [ 32 ] A true Christian in Hitler 's Germany and in the occupied countries should have defied the false and counterfeit state and hidden his Jewish neighbors from the German SS Troops . The government had abrogated its authority, and it had no right to make any demands.

He then suggests that similar tactics be used to stop abortion. But Schaeffer argues he is not talking about a theocracy: State officials must know that we are serious about stopping abortion… First , we must make definite that we are in no way talking about any kind of theocracy. Let me say that with great emphasis.  Witherspoon, Jefferson, the American Founders had no idea of a theocracy. That is made plain by the First Amendment, and we must continually emphasize the fact that we are not talking about some kind, or any kind, of a theocracy.

[ 33 ] Christian Reconstructionists Gary North and David Chilton were highly critical of A Christian Manifesto and Schaeffer.

[ 34 ] Their critical comments were prompted, they wrote, by the popularity of Schaeffer's book.

[ 35 ] They suggested that Schaeffer supports pluralism because he sees the First Amendment as freedom of religion for all; and they themselves reject pluralism.

[ 36 ] Pointing out negative statements Schaeffer made about theocracy, North and Chilton then explain why they promote it.

[ 37 ] They extend their criticism of Schaeffer: The fact remains that Dr. Schaeffer's manifesto offers no prescriptions for a Christian society.

We mention that merely in the interests of clarity, for we are not sure that anybody has noticed it up to now.  The same comment applies to all of Dr. Schaeffer's writings: he does not spell out the Christian alternative.

[ 38 ] Influence on Christian conservatives [ edit ] Christian conservative leaders such as Tim LaHaye have credited Schaeffer for influencing their theological arguments urging political participation by evangelicals.

[ 39 ] Beginning in the 1990s, critics [ who?

] began exploring the intellectual and ideological connection between Schaeffer's political activism and writings of the early 1980s to contemporary religious-political trends in the Christian Right, sometimes grouped under the name Dominionism , with mixed conclusions.

[ citation needed ] Sara Diamond and Frederick Clarkson [ 40 ] have written articles tracing the activism of numerous key figures in the Christian Right to the influence of Francis Schaeffer. According to Diamond: "The idea of taking dominion over secular society gained widespread currency with the 1981 publication of...Schaeffer's book A Christian Manifesto . The book sold 290,000 copies in its first year, and it remains one of the movement's most frequently cited texts." [ 41 ] Diamond summarizes the book and its importance to the Christian Right: In A Christian Manifesto , Schaeffer's argument is simple. The United States began as a nation rooted in Biblical principles. But as society became more pluralistic, with each new wave of immigrants, proponents of a new philosophy of secular humanism gradually came to dominate debate on policy issues. Since humanists place human progress, not God, at the center of their considerations, they pushed American culture in all manner of ungodly directions, the most visible results of which included legalized abortion and the secularization of the public schools. At the end of -- A Christian Manifesto, Schaeffer calls for Christians to use civil disobedience to restore Biblical morality, which explains Schaeffer's popularity with groups like Operation Rescue .

Randall Terry has credited Schaeffer as a major influence in his life.

[ 41 ] Frederick Clarkson explains that this had practical applications: "Francis Schaeffer is widely credited with providing the impetus for Protestant evangelical political action against abortion. For example, Randall Terry, the founder of Operation Rescue, says: "You have to read Schaeffer's Christian Manifesto if you want to understand Operation Rescue." Schaeffer, a longtime leader in Rev. Carl McIntire's splinter denomination, the Bible Presbyterian Church , was a reader of Reconstructionist literature but has been reluctant to acknowledge its influence. Indeed, Schaeffer and his followers specifically rejected the modern application of Old Testament law." [ 42 ] Analyses of Schaeffer as the major intellectual influence on Dominionism can be found in the works of authors such as Diamond [ 43 ] and Chip Berlet .

[ 44 ] Other authors argue against a close connection with dominionism, for example Irving Hexham of the University of Calgary , who maintains that Schaeffer's political position has been misconstrued as advocating the Dominionist views of R. J. Rushdoony , who is a Christian Reconstructionist. Hexham indicates that Schaeffer's essential philosophy was derived from Herman Dooyeweerd , not Rushdoony, and that Hans Rookmaaker introduced Schaeffer to his writings.

[ 45 ] Dooyeweerd was a Dutch legal scholar and philosopher, following in the footsteps of Neo-Calvinist Abraham Kuyper .

Congresswoman and 2012 United States presidential candidate Michele Bachmann has cited Schaeffer's documentary series How Should We Then Live?

as having a "profound influence" on her life and that of her husband Marcus.

[ 46 ] Writings [ edit ] The complete works of Francis Schaeffer.

Francis A. Schaeffer wrote twenty-two books, which covering a range of issues. They can be roughly split into five sections, as in the edition of his Complete Works ( ISBN 0-89107-347-7 ): A Christian View of Philosophy and Culture : The first three books in this block are known as Schaeffer's "trilogy", laying down the apologetical, philosophical, epistemological, and theological foundation for all his work.

The God Who Is There : Deals with the existence and relevance of God, and how modern man came to first distance himself from, and ultimately disbelieve, God as revealed by the Bible.

Escape from Reason : How the rejection of the biblical God causes man to lose contact with reality and reason.

He Is There and He Is Not Silent : How God speaks to man through the Bible on the three philosophically fundamental areas of metaphysics , morals , and epistemology .

Back to Freedom and Dignity : An answer to B.F. Skinner 's Beyond Freedom and Dignity , arguing that freedom and dignity of man are God-given and therefore can't be left aside without dire consequences.

A Christian View of the Bible as Truth Genesis in Space and Time : Argues that the historical (as opposed to literalist or figurative) view of Genesis as historically true is fundamental to the Christian faith.

No Final Conflict Joshua and the Flow of Biblical History Basic Bible Studies : Biblical studies on the fundamentals of the faith.

Art and the Bible A Christian View of Spirituality No Little People : Argues that Christians should never despair of having a significant life of realizations, small as they seem to be.

True Spirituality : The spiritual foundation for Schaeffer's work, as a complement to the theological and philosophical approach of most other books. Useful for gaining a balanced view of the whole of Schaeffer's life and ministry.

The New Super-Spirituality : Claims the intellectual decadence of students and the counter-culture from the late sixties to the early seventies can be traced back to the conformism of their fathers, only with fewer moral absolutes, and predicts the contamination of the church. Offers an analysis of Postmodernism .

Two Contents, Two Realities : First presented as a position paper at the First International Congress on World Evangelization at Lausanne, Switzerland in 1974.

A Christian View of the Church The Church at the End of the Twentieth Century The Church Before the Watching World The Mark of the Christian : Analyzes the balance between the holiness of God and the love of God in the spiritual life of the Bible-believing Christian.

Death in the City The Great Evangelical Disaster A Christian View of the West Pollution and the Death of Man .

A Christian response to issues concerning ecology .

How Should We Then Live? The Rise and Decline of Western Thought and Culture .

This is also a film/video series produced and directed by his son Frank Schaeffer.

Whatever Happened to the Human Race?

(with future Surgeon General Dr. C. Everett Koop ). A Christian response to abortion, euthanasia , and infanticide . This is also a film/video series produced and directed by his son Frank Schaeffer.

A Christian Manifesto : Christian principles for secular politics.

In addition to his books, one of the last public lectures Schaeffer delivered was at the Law Faculty, University of Strasbourg. It was published as "Christian Faith and Human Rights", The Simon Greenleaf Law Review , 2 (1982–83) pp. 3–12.  Most of his writings during his Bible Presbyterian days have not been collected, nor reprinted in decades.

In addition to the five volume Complete Works listed above there were also two books by Dr. Schaeffer published after his death: Dennis, Lane T. (ed) Letters of Francis A. Schaeffer , Crossway Books, Westchester, 1985.

Schaeffer, Francis A.

The Finished Work of Christ: The Truth of Romans 1–8 , Crossway Books, Wheaton, 1998.

Films [ edit ] Schaeffer was persuaded to adapt his book How Should We Then Live? The Rise and Decline of Western Thought and Culture to film by Gospel Films, Inc. CEO and executive evangelical media producer Billy Zeoli who pitched the idea of hiring Schaeffer's then recently married son, teenage father, and painter Frank Schaeffer as a producer for the film project.  Zeoli was instrumental in providing the Schaeffers with introductions to wealthy American evangelicals who would eventually bankroll the How We Should Then Live film project. This book is still being read and used today in American Universities as well as in various small group studies to help shed light on the contemporary cultural problems of the past and how they have led to many of the issues that America is facing today.

[ 47 ] Issues such as race, apathy, abortion, and the non-compassionate use of wealth are topics still relevant today. Schaeffer argues that the humanist base for morals is fundamentally a weak base upon which to build a moral framework for society. By contrast, the Bible, understood as the revealed revelation from God is able to provide a fundamentally sound basis for societal norms as well as a base for science. The president of Christian Leaders Institute (CLI), Henry Reyenga Jr., secured rights to post this film series in an ethics class at CLI. This freemium ministry training school lists "deceased" Francis Schaeffer on its faculty.

[ 48 ] The American distribution of the book and film was responsible for bringing many evangelical Protestants into the then largely Roman Catholic public protest movement against the United States Supreme Court Roe v. Wade decision, 410 U.S.

113 (1973) supporting legal abortion in the United States.

[ 49 ] How Should We Then Live?  The Rise and Decline of Western Thought and Culture (1976). Frank Schaeffer produced his father Francis Schaeffer's film series, which was released with a book by the same title.

Whatever Happened to the Human Race?

(1979). A Christian response to abortion, euthanasia , and infanticide , narrated by Francis Schaeffer and future Surgeon General Dr. C. Everett Koop ; it was released with a book by the same title.

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b "Biographical Sketch" , Francis August Schaeffer Papers , PCA Historical Center, archived from the original on May 17, 2014 , retrieved August 26, 2006 .

^ List of works by Edith Schaeffer , Amazon .

^ Schaeffer, Francis A. (1985), "The complete works of Francis A. Schaeffer. 1: A Christian view of philosophy and culture", Book One:  The God Who is There (2 ed.), Wheaton, Ill: Crossway, p. 9, ISBN 978-0-89107-332-1 ^ a b c d Hankins, Barry (2008).

Francis Schaeffer and the Shaping of Evangelical America . Eerdmans.

^ Duriez 2008 , p. 15-16.

^ Duriez 2008 , p. 34.

^ Francis A. Schaeffer, "A Step Forward" , The Presbyterian Journal , March 6, 1974, pp. 7–8. Retrieved September 7, 2007.

^ Hamilton, Michael S., "The Dissatisfaction of Francis Schaeffer" , Christianity Today , vol. 41, no. 3, A Tribute to Mark Heard, p. 22, archived from the original on December 21, 2006 , retrieved August 25, 2006 .

^ a b c Schaeffer 2007 , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ "Francis August Schaeffer Papers [Early Ministry] Manuscript Collection # 29, Box 134" . PCA Historical Center. Archived from the original on May 17, 2014 . Retrieved July 24, 2006 .

^ Douglas, James Dixon (1992).

Who's who in Christian History . Tyndale House. p. 609.

ISBN 978-0-8423-1014-7 .

^ Parkhurst, LG (1985), "Appendix A: Chronology of the Life of Francis Schaeffer", Francis Schaeffer: The Man and His Message , Wheaton, IL: Tyndale House, pp.

213– 15 .

^ Duriez 2008 , p. 210.

^ Saxon, Wolfgang, "Rev. Francis A. Schaeffer, 72; Founder of Spiritual Centers", New York Times , May 17, 1984.

^ "Founding" .

^ Schaeffer 2007 , p. 140.

^ Guinness, Os (March–April 2008).

"Fathers and Sons: On Francis Schaeffer, Frank Schaeffer, and Crazy for God " .

Books & Culture . Retrieved May 23, 2008 .

^ Ethics daily , archived from the original on January 14, 2012 , retrieved April 12, 2012 .

^ Winston, Kimberly (June 13, 2014).

"Frank Schaeffer, Former Evangelical Leader, Is A Self-Declared Atheist Who Believes in God" .

Huffington Post . Retrieved April 2, 2016 .

^ Oppenheimer, Mark (August 19, 2011).

"Son of Evangelical Royalty Turns His Back, and Tells the Tale" .

The New York Times . Retrieved April 2, 2016 .

^ Schaeffer, Francis, "A Review of a Review", in The Bible Today , October 1948, pp. 7–9. Accessed August 21, 2006. Reprinted at PCA Historical Center .

^ Budziszewski, J (May 2000).

"Evidentialists and Presuppositionalists" . Letters.

First Things . Retrieved May 19, 2019 .

^ Edgar, William (Spring 1995), "Two Christian Warriors: Cornelius Van Til and Francis A. Schaeffer Compared", Westminster Theological Journal , 57 (1): 57– 80 .

^ Schaeffer, Francis, "Chapter 9: The Universe and Two Chairs", in Death in the City , reprinted at Nehemiah's Prayer Watch . Retrieved August 22, 2006.

^ Pearcey, Nancy (2004), Total Truth: Liberating Christianity From Its Cultural Captivity , Wheaton, IL: Crossway Books, p. 453 .

^ "Our Purpose", FSI , Covenant seminary, archived from the original on September 1, 2006 , retrieved August 26, 2006 .

^ Hamilton, Michael (March 3, 1997).

"The Dissatisfaction of Francis Schaeffer" .

Christianity Today . Retrieved April 2, 2016 .

^ Silliman, Daniel (October 9, 2023).

"Died: Loren Cunningham, Who Launched Millions on Short-Term Missions" .

Christianity Today . Retrieved August 9, 2024 .

^ Hardy, Elle (March 19, 2020).

"The 'modern apostles' who want to reshape America ahead of the end times" .

The Mountain . Retrieved August 9, 2024 .

^ Jon, Ronson.

"Things fell apart. Episode 1: 1000 dolls" . BBC . Retrieved November 16, 2021 .

^ Schaeffer, Francis (1982), A Christian Manifesto (revised ed.), Crossway, ISBN 0-89107-233-0 .

^ Schaeffer, Francis (1982), A Christian Manifesto , People for life , retrieved June 24, 2005 .

^ Schaeffer, Francis, A Christian Manifesto, in The Collected Works… Volume 5, pp. 485–86.

^ North, Gary; Chilton, David (1983), "Apologetics and Strategy", in North, Gary (ed.), Tactics of Christian Resistance: A Symposium , Tyler, TX : Geneva Divinity School, pp.

100– 40 .

^ North & Chilton 1983 , pp. 116–17.

^ North & Chilton 1983 , pp. 128–29.

^ North & Chilton 1983 , pp. 121–22.

^ North & Chilton 1983 , pp. 127–28.

^ Tim LaHaye, 1980, The Battle for the Mind , Old Tappan, NJ: Fleming H. Revell, p. 5.

^ Clarkson, Frederick (1994).

"Theocratic Dominionism Gains Influence" .

The Public Eye Magazine VIII (1 & 2).

^ a b Diamond, Sara (1994). "Dominion Theology: The Truth About the Christian Right's Bid for Power", Z Magazine (column) February 1995.

Publiceye.org .

^ Clarkson, Frederick. (1995). "Christian Reconstructionism: Theocratic Dominionism Gains Influence." In Chip Berlet (Ed.), Eyes Right! Challenging the Right Wing Backlash (pp. 59–80). Boston: South End Press. Revised and included in Clarkson, Eternal Hostility .

Publiceye.org ^ Sara Diamond, 1995, Roads to Dominion: Right–Wing Movements and Political Power in the United States , New York: Guilford, pp. 246-249.

^ Chip Berlet and Matthew N. Lyons, 2000, Right–Wing Populism in America: Too Close for Comfort , New York: Guilford Press, pp. 212-213.

^ Hexham, Irving, "The Evangelical Response to the New Age", in Perspectives on the New Age, edited by James R. Lewis & J. Gordon Melton, State University of New York Press, Albany, New York, 1992, pp. 152-163, and especially p. 322 Note 16.

^ Lizza, Ryan , "Leap of Faith: The making of a Republican front-runner" , New Yorker Magazine , August 15, 2011.

^ "The Late Dr. Francis Schaeffer" .

Free Ministry Training – Ordination . Christian leadership institute. June 5, 2011 . Retrieved September 15, 2016 .

^ "The Late Dr. Francis Schaeffer" .

Free Ministry Training – Ordination . Christian leadership institute. June 5, 2011 . Retrieved September 15, 2016 .

^ Randall Balmer (May 27, 2014).

"The Real Origins of the Religious Right" .

POLITICO Magazine . Retrieved May 4, 2022 .

Cited sources [ edit ] Duriez, Colin (2008), Francis Schaeffer, An Authentic Life (PDF) , Wheaton, IL : Crossway Books, archived from the original (PDF) on June 21, 2015 , retrieved June 21, 2015 .

Schaeffer, Frank (2007), Crazy for God: How I Grew Up as One of the Elect, Helped Found the Religious Right, and Lived to Take All (or Almost All) of It Back , Da Capo Press, ISBN 978-0-7867-1891-7 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bazinek, Leonore, "Schaeffer, Francis A. (1912-1984)", in Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon Vol. 8, 1398–1405.

Bazinek, Leonore, "Das Problem der Erkenntnis von Wahrheit im Feld der Begegnung von pluralistischer und biblisch-christlicher Weltanschauung, Regensburg: Roderer, 1990.

Boa, Kenneth D., and Robert M. Bowman, Faith Has Its Reasons: An Integrative Approach to Defending Christianity , NAV Press, Colorado Springs, 2001.

Burson, Scott R. and Jerry L. Walls.

C.S. Lewis and Francis Schaeffer: Lessons for a New Century from the Most Influential Apologists of Our Time.

Leicester: InterVarsity Press, 1998.

Coward, Harold, Pluralism: The Challenge to World Religions , Orbis Books, Maryknoll, 1986.

Cunningham, Stuart, "Towards A Critique of Francis Schaeffer's Thought", Interchange , 24 (1978) pp. 205–21.

Dennis, Lane T. (ed) Francis A. Schaeffer: Portraits of the Man and His Work , Crossway, Westchester, 1986.

Follis, Bryan A., Truth With Love: Apologetics of Francis Schaeffer , Crossway, Wheaton, 2006.

Fowler, Robert Booth, A New Engagement: Evangelical Political Thought 1966–1976 , William B. Eerdmans, Grand Rapids, 1982.

Garber, Stephen S. (Spring 2002).

"Substantial healing, one more time" .

Knowing & Doing : 8– 11, 19.

Hankins, Barry, Francis Schaeffer And the Shaping of Evangelical America, Wm. B. Eerdmans, Grand Rapids, 2008.

Hexham, Irving, "The Evangelical Response to the New Age", in Perspectives on the New Age , edited by James R. Lewis & J. Gordon Melton, State University of New York Press, Albany, New York, 1992, pp. 152–63.

Kubsch, Ron, ed. (2007), Wahrheit und Liebe: Was wir von Francis Schaeffer für die Gegenwart lernen können (in German), Bonn: VKW .

Morris, Thomas V., Francis Schaeffer's Apologetics: A Critique , Baker Book House, Grand Rapids, 1987.

Parkhurst, Louis Gifford, Francis Schaeffer: The Man and His Message , Tyndale House, Wheaton, 1985.

——— (1996), Francis & Edith Schaeffer , Minneapolis: Bethany House .

Ramsey, George W., The Quest for the Historical Israel , SCM Press, London, 1982, pp. 107–15.

Roper, D. L., "A Sympathetic Criticism of Francis Schaeffer's Writings", Interchange , 41 (1987) pp. 41–55.

Ruegsegger, Ronald W, ed. (1986), Reflections on Francis Schaeffer , Grand Rapids: Zondervan .

Stadler, G Thomas (June 1989), "Renaissance Humanism: Francis Schaeffer Versus Some Contemporary Scholars", Fides et Historia , 2 : 4– 20 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Francis Schaeffer .

L'Abri Fellowship International The Francis A. Schaeffer Foundation Continuing work of Francis A. Schaeffer Continuing the Legacy and Influence of Francis Schaeffer with New Research and Findings The Francis A. Schaeffer Institute of Church Leadership Development Cybershelter Schaeffer's Papers Archived May 17, 2014, at the Wayback Machine at the PCA Historical Center The Francis Schaeffer Institute at Covenant Seminary The L'Abri Network , Free Online Biographies on Francis and Edith Schaeffer The Shelter , a site dedicated to the thought and writings of Schaeffer Francis Schaeffer Studies , a site dedicated to the study of the Works of Francis Schaeffer Schaeffer, Francis (1982).

A Christian Manifesto – Lecture based on book.

Anthony Oughton's article in Evangelical Times offers an evangelical perspective on Schaeffer and his influence on contemporaries including Edgar and Barrs.

v t e Bible Presbyterianism People Carl McIntire J. Oliver Buswell Allan MacRae R. Laird Harris Francis Schaeffer Jack Murray Clyde J. Kennedy Robert G. Rayburn Lynn Gray Gordon Thomas Lambie Timothy Tow Arthur Steele Gary Cohen Quek Swee Hwa Denominational bodies General Synod, Bible Presbyterian Church (USA) Bible-Presbyterian churches (Singapore) Councils International International Council of Christian Churches (ICCC) Regional Far Eastern Council of Christian Churches (FECCC) East Africa Christian Alliance (EACA) Latin American Alliance of Christian Churches (LAACC) Alianza Latinoamericana de Iglesias Cristianas (ALADIC) National American Council of Christian Churches (ACCC) Singapore Council of Christian Churches (SCCC) Fundamentalist Bible Presbyterian Church of Chile (IPFB) Mission boards Independent Board for Presbyterian Foreign Missions (IBPFM) Presbyterian Missionary Union (PMU) Churches Bible Presbyterian Church of Collingswood Life Bible-Presbyterian Church Baraka Bible Presbyterian Church Fundamentalist Bible Presbyterian Church of Chile Institutions Seminaries Faith Theological Seminary Far Eastern Bible College Biblical Theological Seminary Western Reformed Seminary Biblical Graduate School of Theology Liberal arts Shelton College Highland College Covenant College Clearwater Christian College Facilities Harvey Cedars Bible Presbyterian Conference Christian Admiral Periodicals Christian Beacon WRS Journal The Burning Bush Related Verbal plenary preservation Khoo Jeffrey and others v Life Bible-Presbyterian Church and others Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Korea Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nqj5j
Cached time: 20250817045339
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.175 seconds
Real time usage: 1.447 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8925/1000000
Revision size: 45234/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 211816/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 17935/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 155917/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.763/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25097961/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1168.728      1 -total
 19.48%  227.654      1 Template:Reflist
 13.18%  154.075      1 Template:Infobox_theologian
 11.38%  133.041     18 Template:Citation
 11.36%  132.783      1 Template:Conservatism_US
 10.41%  121.675     11 Template:Sfn
  9.53%  111.396     12 Template:Fix
  8.04%   93.948      1 Template:Lang
  6.20%   72.507      1 Template:Short_description
  4.98%   58.157      3 Template:Page_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:178777:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045339 and revision id 1302863198. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Francis_Schaeffer&oldid=1302863198 " Categories : 1912 births 1984 deaths 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century American philosophers 20th-century Calvinist and Reformed theologians 20th-century American Presbyterian ministers American Calvinist and Reformed theologians American evangelicals American male non-fiction writers American people of English descent American people of German descent American religious writers Calvinist and Reformed philosophers Calvinist and Reformed writers Christian apologists Clergy from Philadelphia American critics of atheism Deaths from cancer in Minnesota Deaths from lymphoma in the United States Faith Theological Seminary alumni Hampden–Sydney College alumni American philosophers of religion Presbyterian Church in America ministers Presbyterians from Pennsylvania Presbyterian writers Westminster Theological Seminary alumni Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2021 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2016 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Articles containing French-language text All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from August 2011 Articles lacking reliable references from August 2011 All articles lacking reliable references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2015 Articles that may contain original research from August 2011 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2023 CS1 German-language sources (de) Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 20:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Francis Schaeffer 15 languages Add topic

