Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Forms Toggle Forms subsection 1.1 Legal egalitarianism 1.1.1 Equality of person 1.1.2 Gender equality 1.2 Social egalitarianism 1.2.1 Economic 1.3 Egalitarianism and non-human animals 1.4 Religious and spiritual egalitarianism 1.4.1 Christianity 1.4.2 Islam 2 Discussion Toggle Discussion subsection 2.1 Alexander Berkman and Thompson et. al 2.2 Marxism 2.3 Murray Rothbard 2.4 Equity 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Egalitarianism 64 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Русский Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenščina Soomaaliga Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia School of thought favoring equality for all people "Equalist" redirects here. For the antagonists in The Legend of Korra, see The Equalists .

Weighing scales often symbolize equality before the law .

Egalitarianism (from French égal ' equal ' ; also equalitarianism ) is a school of thought within political philosophy that builds on the concept of social equality , prioritizing it for all people.

[ 1 ] Egalitarian doctrines are generally characterized by the idea that all humans are equal in fundamental worth or moral status.

[ 2 ] As such, all people should be accorded equal rights and treatment under the law .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Egalitarian doctrines have supported many modern social movements, including the Enlightenment , feminism , civil rights , and international human rights .

[ 5 ] Egalitarianism is the foundation of left-wing politics .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] One key aspect of egalitarianism is its emphasis on equal opportunities for all individuals, regardless of their background or circumstances. This means ensuring that everyone has access to the same resources, education, and opportunities to succeed in life. By promoting equal opportunities, egalitarianism aims to level the playing field and reduce disparities that result from social inequalities.

Forms [ edit ] Some specifically focused egalitarian concerns include communism , legal egalitarianism , luck egalitarianism , political egalitarianism , gender egalitarianism , racial equality , equality of opportunity , and Christian egalitarianism . Common forms of egalitarianism include political and philosophical.

[ 10 ] Legal egalitarianism [ edit ] Further information: Equality before the law Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e One argument is that liberalism provides democratic societies with the means to carry out civic reform by providing a framework for developing public policy and providing the correct conditions for individuals to achieve civil rights.

[ 11 ] There are two major types of equality: [ 12 ] Formal equality : individual merit-based equality of opportunity .

Substantive equality : moves away from individual merit-based comparison towards equality of outcomes for groups and social equity .

Equality of person [ edit ] The English Bill of Rights of 1689 and the United States Constitution use only the term person in operative language involving fundamental rights and responsibilities, except for a reference to men in the English Bill of Rights regarding men on trial for treason; and a rule of proportional Congressional representation in the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution .

[ citation needed ] As the rest of the Constitution, in its operative language the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution uses the term person, stating that "nor shall any State deprives any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws".

[ 13 ] Gender equality [ edit ] The motto " Liberté, égalité, fraternité " was used during the French Revolution and is still used as an official motto of the French government. The 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen French Constitution is also framed with this basis in equal rights of humankind.

[ citation needed ] The Declaration of Independence of the United States is an example of an assertion of equality of men as " All men are created equal " and the wording of men and man is a reference to both men and women, i.e., mankind.

John Locke is sometimes considered the founder of this form.

[ 14 ] Many state constitutions in the United States also use the rights of man language rather than rights of person [ citation needed ] since the noun man has always been a reference to and an inclusion of both men and women.

[ 15 ] The Tunisian Constitution of 2014 provides that "men and women shall be equal in their rights and duties".

[ 16 ] Feminism is informed by egalitarian philosophy, being a gender-focused philosophy of equality. Feminism is distinguished from egalitarianism by also existing as a political and social movement.

[ 17 ] Social egalitarianism [ edit ] Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e At a cultural level, egalitarian theories have developed in sophistication and acceptance during the past two hundred years. Among the notable broadly egalitarian philosophies are socialism , communism , social anarchism , libertarian socialism , left-libertarianism , and progressivism , some of which propound economic egalitarianism . Anti-egalitarianism [ 18 ] or elitism [ 19 ] is opposition to egalitarianism.

Economic [ edit ] An early example of equality is what might be described as outcome economic egalitarianism is the Chinese philosophy of agriculturalism which held that the economic policies of a country need to be based upon egalitarian self-sufficiency.

[ 20 ] In socialism , social ownership of means of production is sometimes considered to be a form of economic egalitarianism because in an economy characterized by social ownership the surplus product generated by industry would accrue to the population as a whole as opposed to a class of private owners, thereby granting each increased autonomy and greater equality in their relationships with one another. Although the economist Karl Marx is sometimes mistaken to be an egalitarian, Marx eschewed normative theorizing on moral principles altogether. Marx did have a theory of the evolution of moral principles concerning specific economic systems .

[ 21 ] The American economist John Roemer has put forth a new perspective on equality and its relationship to socialism. Roemer attempts to reformulate Marxist analysis to accommodate normative principles of distributive justice , shifting the argument for socialism away from purely technical and materialist reasons to one of distributive justice. Roemer argues that according to the principle of distributive justice, the traditional definition of socialism is based on the principle that individual compensation is proportional to the value of the labor one expends in production (" To each according to his contribution ") is inadequate. Roemer concludes that egalitarians must reject socialism as it is classically defined for equality to be realized.

[ 22 ] The egalitarian management style focusses on the approach to democratize power, decision-making, and responsibility and distributed them more evenly among all members of a team or organization.

[ 23 ] Egalitarianism and non-human animals [ edit ] Many philosophers, including Ingmar Persson, [ 24 ] Peter Vallentyne , [ 25 ] Nils Holtug, [ 26 ] Catia Faria [ 27 ] and Lewis Gompertz , [ 28 ] have argued that egalitarianism implies that the interests of non-human animals must be taken into account as well. Philosopher Oscar Horta has further argued that egalitarianism implies rejecting speciesism , ceasing to exploit non-human animals and aiding animals suffering in nature .

[ 29 ] Furthermore, Horta argues that non-human animals should be prioritized since they are worse off than humans.

[ 29 ] Religious and spiritual egalitarianism [ edit ] Christianity [ edit ] See also: Christian egalitarianism In 1957, Martin Luther King Jr.

quoted Galatians 3:28 ("There is neither Jew nor Greek, slave nor free, male nor female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus" [ 30 ] ) in a pamphlet opposing racial segregation in the United States . He wrote, "Racial segregation is a blatant denial of the unity which we all have in Christ." [ 31 ] He also alluded to that verse at the end of his 1963 " I Have a Dream " speech.

[ 32 ] The verse is cited to support an egalitarian interpretation of Christianity.

[ 33 ] According to Jakobus M. Vorster, the central question debated by theologians is whether the statement about ecclesiastical relationships can be translated into a Christian-ethical norm for all human relationships.

[ 34 ] Vorster argues that it can, and that the verse provides a Christian foundation for the promotion of human rights and equality, in contrast to "patriarchy, racism and exploitation" which in his opinion are caused by human sinfulness.

[ 34 ] Karin Neutel notes how some apply the philosophy of Paul's statement to include sexuality, health and race saying "[The original] three pairs must have been as relevant in the first century, as the additional categories are today." She argues that the verse points to a utopian , cosmopolitan community.

[ 32 ] Islam [ edit ] The verse 49 :13 of The Quran states: "O mankind, indeed We have created you from male and female and made you peoples and tribes that you may know one another. Indeed, the noblest of you in the sight of Allah is the most righteous of you. Indeed, Allah is Knowing and Acquainted".

[ 35 ] Muhammad echoed these egalitarian sentiments, sentiments that clashed with the practices of the pre-Islamic cultures.

[ citation needed ] In a review of Louise Marlow's Hierarchy and Egalitarianism in Islamic Thought, Ismail Poonawala argues the desire for the Arab-Muslim Empire to consolidate power and administer the state rather led to the deemphasis of egalitarian teachings in the Qur'an and by the Prophet.

[ 36 ] . Other verses indicate that only muslims are eligible for this equality, e.g. Surah 98:6 "Indeed, they who disbelieved among the People of the Scripture and the polytheists will be in the fire of Hell, abiding eternally therein. Those are the worst of creatures." Discussion [ edit ] Alexander Berkman and Thompson et. al [ edit ] Thompson et al. theorize that any society consisting of only one perspective, be it egalitarianism, hierarchies, individualist , fatalist or autonomists will be inherently unstable as the claim is that an interplay between all these perspectives are required if each perspective is to be fulfilling. Although an individualist according to cultural theory is aversive towards both principles and groups, individualism is not fulfilling if individual brilliance cannot be recognized by groups, or if individual brilliance cannot be made permanent in the form of principles.

[ 37 ] : 121 Accordingly, they argue that egalitarians have no power except through their presence, unless they (by definition, reluctantly) embrace principles which enable them to cooperate with fatalists and hierarchies. They argue that this means they will also have no individual sense of direction without a group, which could be mitigated by following individuals outside their group, namely autonomists or individualists.

Alexander Berkman suggests that "equality does not mean an equal amount but equal opportunity. ... Do not make the mistake of identifying equality in liberty with the forced equality of the convict camp. True anarchist equality implies freedom, not quantity. It does not mean that everyone must eat, drink, or wear the same things, do the same work, or live in the same manner. Far from it: the very reverse. ... Individual needs and tastes differ, as appetites differ. It is an equal opportunity to satisfy them that constitutes true equality. ... Far from leveling, such equality opens the door for the greatest possible variety of activity and development. For human character is diverse." [ 38 ] The cultural theory of risk holds egalitarianism—with fatalism termed as its opposite [ 37 ] : 78 —as defined by a negative attitude towards rules and principles; and a positive attitude towards group decision-making .

[ 37 ] : 157 The theory distinguishes between hierarchists , who are positive towards both rules and groups; and egalitarians, who are positive towards groups, but negative towards rules. This is by definition a form of anarchist equality as referred to by Berkman. Thus, the fabric of an egalitarian society is held together by cooperation and implicit peer pressure rather than by explicit rules and punishment.

[ 37 ] : 158 Marxism [ edit ] Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels believed that an international proletarian revolution would bring about a socialist society which would then eventually give way to a communist stage of social development which would be a classless, stateless, moneyless, humane society erected on common ownership of the means of production and the principle of " From each according to their ability, to each according to their needs ".

[ 39 ] Marxism rejected egalitarianism in the sense of greater equality between classes, clearly distinguishing it from the socialist notion of the abolition of classes based on the division between workers and owners of productive property.

[ citation needed ] Allen Woods finds that Marx's view of classlessness was not the subordination of society to a universal interest such as a universal notion of equality, but it was about the creation of the conditions that would enable individuals to pursue their true interests and desires, making Marx's notion of communist society radically individualistic.

[ 40 ] Although his position is often confused or conflated with distributive egalitarianism in which only the goods and services resulting from production are distributed according to notional equality, Marx eschewed the entire concept of equality as abstract and bourgeois, preferring to focus on more concrete principles such as opposition to exploitation on materialist grounds and economic logic, or the philosophical concepts like alienation.

[ 41 ] Murray Rothbard [ edit ] In the title essay of his book Egalitarianism as a Revolt Against Nature and Other Essays , Murray Rothbard argued that egalitarian theory always results in a politics of statist control because it is founded on revolt against the ontological structure of reality itself.

[ 42 ] According to Rothbard, individuals are naturally unequal in their abilities, talents, and characteristics. He believed that this inequality was not only natural but necessary for a functioning society. In his view, people's unique qualities and abilities are what allow them to contribute to society in different ways.

[ 42 ] Rothbard argued that egalitarianism was a misguided attempt to impose an artificial equality on individuals, which would ultimately lead to societal breakdown. He believed that attempts to force equality through government policies or other means would stifle individual freedom and prevent people from pursuing their own interests and passions.

[ 42 ] Furthermore, Rothbard believed that egalitarianism was rooted in envy and resentment towards those who were more successful or talented than others. He saw it as a destructive force that would lead to a culture of mediocrity, where people were discouraged from striving for excellence.

[ 42 ] Equity [ edit ] Main article: Social equity The Atlas movement defines equitism as the idea that all groups should have equal rights and benefits.

[ 43 ] The term has been used as the claimed philosophical basis of Telosa , a proposed utopia to be built in the United States by Marc Lore .

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Social equity is about equality of outcomes for each groups, while egalitarianism generally advocates for equality of opportunity, recognizing that a fair society should provide all members with the same opportunities while recognizing that different outcomes are expected due to human individuality.

[ 46 ] See also [ edit ] " All men are created equal " Animal rights Asset-based egalitarianism Citizen's dividend Consociationalism Deep ecology Discrimination Economic inequality Egalitarian social choice rule Equal consideration of interests Equal opportunity Equality of outcome Federation of Egalitarian Communities Feminism Gift economy Inequity aversion Left-wing politics Legal status of transgender people LGBT rights by country or territory Men's rights movement Men's liberation movement Meritocracy Mutualism Natural rights and legal rights Political egalitarianism One man, one vote Reciprocal altruism Redistributive justice Same-sex marriage Social dividend Transfeminism Universal basic income References [ edit ] ^ "egalitarian" .

Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d . Retrieved 7 May 2018 .

^ "Egalitarianism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab. Stanford University. 2019.

^ Robertson, David (2007).

The Routledge Dictionary of Politics . Routledge Taylor and Francis Group. p. 159.

ISBN 978-0415323772 .

^ "Egalitarianism" .

Merriam-Webster Dictionary . 7 June 2023.

^ "Egalitarianism" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 6 October 2022 .

^ Smith, T. Alexander; Tatalovich, Raymond (2003).

Cultures at War: Moral Conflicts in Western Democracies . Toronto, Canada: Broadview Press. p.

30 .

ISBN 978-1551113340 .

^ Bobbio, Norberto; Cameron, Allan (1997).

Left and Right: The Significance of a Political Distinction .

University of Chicago Press . p.

37 .

^ Ball, Terence (2005).

The Cambridge History of Twentieth-Century Political Thought (Reprint. ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . pp.

612– 614.

ISBN 978-0521563543 . Retrieved 15 November 2016 .

^ Thompson, Willie (1997).

The Left In History: Revolution and Reform in Twentieth-Century Politic . London: Pluto Press .

ISBN 978-0745308913 .

^ Arneson, Richard (2013), "Egalitarianism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2013 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 18 June 2022 ^ Rosales, José María (12 March 2010).

Liberalism, Civic Reformism, and Democracy . 20th World Congress on Philosophy: Political Philosophy.

^ De Vos, M. (2020). The European Court of Justice and the march towards substantive equality in European Union anti-discrimination law. International Journal of Discrimination and the Law, 20(1), 62-87.

^ "14th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution: Civil Rights (1868)" .

National Archives . 7 September 2021 . Retrieved 21 June 2024 .

^ Tuckness, Alex (2024), "Locke's Political Philosophy" , in Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2024 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 5 March 2025 ^ Rauer, Christine (2017).

"Mann and Gender in Old English Prose: A Pilot Study" (PDF) .

Neophilologus .

101 : 139– 158.

doi : 10.1007/s11061-016-9489-1 .

hdl : 10023/8978 .

S2CID 55817181 .

^ "The Constitution Project" .

^ Fiss, Owen (1994). "What is feminism".

Arizona State Law Journal .

26 : 413– 428 – via HeinOnline.

^ Sidanius, Jim; et al. (2000). "Social dominance orientation, anti-egalitarianism and the political psychology of gender: An extension and cross-cultural replication".

European Journal of Social Psychology .

30 (1): 41– 67.

doi : 10.1002/(sici)1099-0992(200001/02)30:1<41::aid-ejsp976>3.0.co;2-o .

^ "Antonyms for egalitarian" .

English Thesaurus . Retrieved 28 September 2018 .

^ Denecke, Wiebke (2011).

The Dynamics of Masters Literature: Early Chinese Thought from Confucius to Han Feizi . Harvard University Press. p. 38.

^ "Egalitarianism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . 16 August 2002 . Retrieved 20 November 2013 .

^ Roemer, John (2008). "Socialism vs Social Democracy as Income-Equalizing Institutions".

Eastern Economic Journal .

34 (1): 14– 26.

doi : 10.1057/palgrave.eej.9050011 .

S2CID 153503350 .

^ The culture Map, Erin Meyer, 2014 ^ Persson, I. (1993). "A basis for (interspecies) equality". In Cavalieri, P.; Singer, P. (eds.).

The Great Ape Project . New York, NY: St. Martin's Press. pp.

183– 193.

^ Vallentyne, P. (2005). "Of mice and men: Equality and animals".

Journal of Ethics .

9 ( 3– 4): 403– 433.

doi : 10.1007/s10892-005-3509-x .

hdl : 10355/10183 .

S2CID 13151744 .

^ Holtug, N. (2007). "Equality for animals". In Ryberg, J.; Petersen, T.S.; Wolf, C. (eds.).

New Waves in Applied Ethics . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

1– 24.

^ Faria, C. (2014).

"Equality, priority and nonhuman animals" .

Dilemata: International Journal of Applied Ethics .

14 : 225– 236.

^ Gompertz, L. (1997 [1824]) Moral inquiries on the situation of man and of brutes, London: Open Gate.

^ a b Horta, Oscar (25 November 2014).

"Egalitarianism and Animals" .

Between the Species .

19 (1).

^ "Galatians 3:28 NIV" .

biblia.com . Retrieved 4 October 2020 .

^ " 'For All ... A Non-Segregated Society,' A Message for Race Relations Sunday" .

The Martin Luther King, Jr., Research and Education Institute .

Stanford University . 10 February 1957 . Retrieved 22 August 2020 .

^ a b Neutel, Karin (19 May 2020).

"Galatians 3:28—Neither Jew nor Greek, Slave nor Free, Male and Female" .

Biblical Archaeology Society . Retrieved 22 August 2020 .

^ Buell, Denise Kimber; Hodge, Caroline Johnson (2004). "The Politics of Interpretation: The Rhetoric of Race and Ethnicity in Paul".

Journal of Biblical Literature .

123 (2): 235.

doi : 10.2307/3267944 .

ISSN 0021-9231 .

JSTOR 3267944 .

^ a b Vorster, Jakobus M. (2019).

"The Theological-Ethical Implications of Galatians 3:28 for a Christian Perspective on Equality as a Foundational Value in the Human Rights Discourse" .

In die Skriflig / In Luce Verbi .

53 (1): 8.

doi : 10.4102/ids.v53i1.2494 .

^ "The Quranic Arabic Corpus – Translation" .

corpus.quran.com . Retrieved 30 December 2019 .

^ Poonawala, Ismail (Summer 1999). "Reviewed Work: Hierarchy and Egalitarianism in Islamic Thought by Louise Marlow".

Iranian Studies .

32 (3): 405– 407.

doi : 10.1017/S0021086200002759 .

JSTOR 4311272 .

S2CID 245659108 .

^ a b c d Thompson, Michael; Ellis, Richard; Wildavsky, Aaron (1990).

Cultural Theory . Political Cultures.

Routledge .

ISBN 978-0813378640 .

^ Berkman, Alexander (2003).

What is Anarchism?

.

AK Press . pp.

164– 165.

ISBN 1902593707 .

^ Marx, Karl.

"Critique of the Gotha Programme' " .

^ Woods, Allen (2014). "Karl Marx on Equality".

The Free Development of Each: Studies on Freedom, Right, and Ethics in Classical German Philosophy (PDF) . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199685530.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0199685530 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 November 2015 . Retrieved 12 September 2014 .

Marx thinks the idea of equality is a vehicle for bourgeois class oppression, and something quite different from the communist goal of the abolition of classes. ... A society that has transcended class antagonisms, therefore, would not be one in which some truly universal interest at last reigns, to which individual interests must be sacrificed. It would instead be a society in which individuals freely act as the truly human individuals they are. Marx's radical communism was, in this way, also radically individualistic.

^ Nielsen, Kai (August 1987). "Rejecting Egalitarianism".

Political Theory .

15 (3). SAGE Publications: 411– 423.

doi : 10.1177/0090591787015003008 .

JSTOR 191211 .

S2CID 143748543 .

^ a b c d Rothbard, Murray N. (2000) [1974].

Egalitarianism as a revolt against nature, and other essays (2nd ed.). Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute .

ISBN 0945466234 . Retrieved 17 February 2023 .

^ "The Equitist Manifesto" .

Atlas .

^ Gleeson, Scott.

"Billionaire Marc Lore outlines how he will build the inclusive, Utopian desert city Telosa" .

USA Today . Retrieved 15 February 2024 .

^ Kingson, Jennifer (25 August 2022).

" 'Cities of the future,' built from scratch" .

Axios . Retrieved 15 February 2024 .

^ Alfonseca, Kiara (10 February 2023).

"DEI: What does it mean and what is its purpose?" . ABC News . Retrieved 25 March 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Look up egalitarian in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Look up egalitarianism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Egalitarianism .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy "Egalitarianism" . Archived from the original on 24 January 2017 . Retrieved 30 December 2016 .

"Moral Egalitarianism" . Archived from the original on 17 July 2014 . Retrieved 15 July 2014 .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Arneson, Richard (2002).

Egalitarianism . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Gosepath, Stefan (2007).

Equality . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Arneson, Richard (2002).

Equality of opportunity . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Lepowsky, Maria (1993).

Fruit of the Motherland: Gender in an Egalitarian Society . New York: Columbia University Press. Archived from the original on 25 December 2007.

"The Equality Studies Centre" .

"Twin Oaks Intentional Community" .

"Federation of Egalitarian Communities" .

Government v t e Politics and government Overviews State Nation Empire Central government Unitary state Federal government National unity government Levels: Local government County government Administrative division Municipality Township Systems Lists: Govt systems Countries by system Systems: Anarchy Aristocracy Bureaucracy Capitalism Confederation Colonialism Communism Electocracy Ergatocracy Federalism Feudalism Geniocracy Kleptocracy Meritocracy Military dictatorship Monarchy Oligarchy Plutocracy Republicanism Socialism Statism Technocracy Theocracy Totalitarianism Democracy : Parliamentary system Presidential system Cellular Collaborative Consensus Conservative Cosmopolitan Direct democracy Representative democracy Republic Philosophies Agrarianism Anarchism Authoritarianism Centrism Christian democracy Collectivism Communalism Communitarianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Corporatism Distributism Egalitarianism Environmentalism Extremism Familialism Fanaticism Fascism Feminism Fundamentalism Liberalism Progressivism Theoreticians: John Locke Functions Social insurance Law enforcement Unemployment benefits National healthcare Public education Military Espionage Regulation: Environmental regulation Banking regulation Food inspection Municipal: Traffic lights Sanitation Street cleaning Components Documents Constitution Charter Uncodified constitution Roles: Head of state Head of government Monarch President Prime minister Bodies: Cabinet Ministry Judiciary Legislature Legislative bodies Congress Parliament Council Assembly Legislative council Governance processes Process: Hearing Committee Town meeting Outcomes: Legislation Regulation Zoning Law : Precedent Politics Elections : Voting Campaigns Groups: Political parties Advocacy groups Issues: Civil rights Environmentalism Academic Fields of study Political science Urban planning Sociology History Overviews: Political history of the world History of political thought Reforms Suffrage Documents: Magna Carta U.S. Constitution International Diplomacy Embassy Treaty International law World: World government United Nations European Union World Court Related Human history History of philosophy Civilization Templates: {{ Political ideologies }} {{ Political culture }} {{ Political spectrum }} {{ Social and political philosophy }} {{ liberalism }} {{ Conservatism navbox }} {{ aspects of capitalism }} {{ Western culture }} {{ Autonomous types of first-tier administration }} {{ World government }} Categories Forms of government Types of democracy Political parties v t e Common types of government ministers and ministries Leadership President Vice president Prime minister Deputy prime minister First minister Deputy First Minister Premier Office of the president Cabinet department / Office of the prime minister Speaker / President of the assembly Minister Titles Secretary of state Minister of state Deputy minister Undersecretary Assistant minister/Parliamentary secretary Associate Minister Defence / foreign affairs / public safety Ministry of defence Ministry of foreign affairs Immigration minister Interior minister Interior ministry International development minister Europe Economics/ infrastructure Commerce minister Ministry of the economy Ministry of finance Minister of industry Ministry of infrastructure Ministry of trade and industry Ministry of transport Environment / natural resources Energy minister Ministry of energy Environment minister Ministry of electricity Ministry of petroleum Ministry of water resources Social Culture minister Ministry of culture Education minister Ministry of education and culture Health minister Ministry of health Information minister Housing minister Ministry of housing Ministry of justice Minister of labour Ministry of labour Regional minister Ministry of sports Tourism minister Ministry of home affairs Ministry of religious affairs Ministry of science Ministry of social affairs Ministry of social security Minister for Veterans Ministry of women Minister for women Other Minister without portfolio Lists Presidents Vice presidents Prime ministers Deputy prime ministers Presidents of assembly Agriculture ministries Climate change ministers Communications ministries Defence ministers Education ministries Environment ministers Environment ministries Finance ministers Foreign ministers Forest ministries Health ministries ( mental health ) Interior ministers Public works ministries Government ministers by portfolio Ministries by portfolio v t e Public services Municipalization Nationalization Progressive tax Concepts Common good Free-culture movement Free newspaper Product sample Public administration Public bad Public domain Public good (economics) Public health Public interest Public land Public ownership Public policy Public rights Public sphere Public procurement Public trust Public value Universal access to education Universal basic services Basic services Civil service Fire department Housing First Law enforcement Postal service Savings system Public broadcasting Public transport Universal basic services Public utility Electric utility Oil & gas Telecommunication Municipal broadband Public infrastructure Public water system Waste management Public works Drinking fountain Drug checking Free clinic Free education Infrastructure Needle and syringe programmes Public art Public bank Public bookcase Public computer Public hospital Public library Public open space Public school Public space Public toilet Public university Reagent testing Supervised injection site Urban park Social services Publicly funded health care Public housing Job creation Job guarantee Single-payer health care National health insurance Social insurance Social pension Social security Youth services See also Commons Free public transport Government auction Public float Public holiday Public offering Public sector Public security Public use Public viewing area Category Commons v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases National Germany Japan Czech Republic Latvia Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐xskdx
Cached time: 20250817043657
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.377 seconds
Real time usage: 1.674 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8010/1000000
Revision size: 31882/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 415008/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 58682/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 252671/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.792/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18501899/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1252.707      1 -total
 29.41%  368.380      1 Template:Reflist
 25.07%  314.002      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.68%  146.302      1 Template:Liberalism_sidebar
 11.29%  141.369      1 Template:Republicanism_sidebar
 11.05%  138.463      1 Template:Politics_series_sidebar
  7.60%   95.223      1 Template:Transliteration
  7.36%   92.166      4 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  7.19%   90.036     16 Template:Cite_book
  7.00%   87.741     15 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:10113:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043657 and revision id 1305032112. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Egalitarianism&oldid=1305032112 " Categories : Egalitarianism Equality rights Consequentialism Fairness criteria Human rights Political culture Social inequality Social justice Social theories Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2021 Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 17:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Egalitarianism 64 languages Add topic

