Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Ancient Greek mythology 3 Greek folk religion 4 Nymphs and fairies 5 Sleeping nymph 6 List Toggle List subsection 6.1 By dwelling or affinity 6.2 By location 6.3 Others 6.4 In non-Greek tales influenced by Greek mythology 7 Gallery 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Nymph 77 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greek and Roman mythological creature This article is about the creatures of Greek mythology. For other uses, see Nymph (disambiguation) .

Nymph William-Adolphe Bouguereau , Nymphs and Satyr , 1873.

Clark Art Institute .

Creature information Grouping Mythological Sub grouping Nature spirit Similar entities Mermaid , hellois , huldra Origin Country Greece Greek deities series Primordial deities Titans and Olympians Water deities Chthonic deities Personified concepts Nymphs Alseids Aurae Daphnaie Dryads Epimelides Hamadryads Hesperides Hyades Krenaiai Lampades Limnades Meliae Naiads Nereids Oceanids Oreads Pegasides Pleiades Thriae v t e A nymph ( Ancient Greek : νύμφη , romanized : nýmphē ; Attic Greek : [nýmpʰɛː] ; sometimes spelled nymphe ) is a minor female nature deity in ancient Greek folklore . Distinct from other Greek goddesses , nymphs are generally regarded as personifications of nature; they are typically tied to a specific place, landform, or tree, and are usually depicted as maidens . Because of their association with springs, they were often seen as having healing properties; [ 1 ] other divine powers of the nymphs included divination and shapeshifting .

[ 2 ] In spite of their divine nature, they were not immortal .

[ 3 ] Nymphs are divided into various broad subgroups based on their habitat, [ 4 ] such as the Meliae ( ash tree nymphs), the Dryads ( oak tree nymphs), the Alseids ( grove nymphs), the Naiads ( spring nymphs), the Nereids (sea nymphs), the Oceanids (ocean nymphs), and the Oreads (mountain nymphs). Other nymphs included the Hesperides (evening nymphs), the Hyades (rain nymphs), and the Pleiades (companions of Artemis ).

Nymphs featured in classic works of art , literature , and mythology . They are often attendants of goddesses and frequently occur in myths with a love motif, being the lovers of heroes and other deities.

[ 4 ] Desirable and promiscuous, nymphs can rarely be fully domesticated, being often aggressive to their mortal affairs.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Since the Middle Ages , nymphs have been sometimes popularly associated or even confused with fairies .

Etymology [ edit ] The Greek word nýmphē has the primary meaning of "young woman; bride, young wife" but is not usually associated with deities in particular. Yet the etymology of the noun nýmphē remains uncertain. The Doric and Aeolic ( Homeric ) form is nýmphā ( νύμφα ).

[ 7 ] Modern usage more often applies to young women, contrasting with parthenos ( παρθένος ) "a virgin (of any age)", and generically as kore ( κόρη < κόρϝα ) "maiden, girl". The term is sometimes used by women to address each other and remains the regular Modern Greek term for " bride ".

Ancient Greek mythology [ edit ] In this 1896 painting of Hylas and the Nymphs by John William Waterhouse , Hylas is abducted by the Naiads , i.e. fresh water nymphs Nymphs were sometimes beloved by many and dwelt in specific areas related to the natural environment: e.g. mountainous regions; forests; springs. Other nymphs were part of the retinue of a god (such as Dionysus , Hermes , or Pan ) or of a goddess (generally the huntress Artemis ).

[ 8 ] The Greek nymphs were also spirits invariably bound to places, not unlike the Latin genius loci , and sometimes this produced complicated myths like the cult of Arethusa to Sicily. In some of the works of the Greek-educated Latin poets , the nymphs gradually absorbed into their ranks the indigenous Italian divinities of springs and streams ( Juturna , Egeria , Carmentis , Fontus ) while the Lymphae (originally Lumpae), Italian water goddesses, owing to the accidental similarity of their names, could be identified with the Greek Nymphae. The classical mythologies of the Roman poets were unlikely to have affected the rites and cults of individual nymphs venerated by country people in the springs and clefts of Latium . Among the Roman literate class, their sphere of influence was restricted and they appear almost exclusively as divinities of the watery element.

[ citation needed ] Greek folk religion [ edit ] The ancient Greek belief in nymphs survived in many parts of the country into the early years of the twentieth century when they were usually known as " nereids ".

[ 9 ] Nymphs often tended to frequent areas distant from humans but could be encountered by lone travelers outside the village, where their music might be heard, and the traveler could spy on their dancing or bathing in a stream or pool, either during the noon heat or in the middle of the night.

[ 10 ] They might appear in a whirlwind. Such encounters could be dangerous, bringing dumbness, besotted infatuation, madness or stroke to the unfortunate man. When parents believed their child to be nereid-struck, they would pray to the Saint Artemius (Perhaps this saint in particular being chosen is due to a corruption of the name of the goddess Artemis . If this is the case, it would be an example of "practical polytheism in the worship of the saints").

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Nymphs and fairies [ edit ] Nymphs are often depicted in classic works across art, literature, mythology, and fiction. They are often associated with the medieval romances or Renaissance literature of the elusive fairies or elves .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Sleeping nymph [ edit ] The statue of a sleeping nymph in a grotto at Stourhead gardens, England.

A motif that entered European art during the Renaissance was the idea of a statue of a nymph sleeping in a grotto or spring.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] This motif supposedly came from an Italian report of a Roman sculpture of a nymph at a fountain above the River Danube .

[ 18 ] The report, and an accompanying poem supposedly on the fountain describing the sleeping nymph, are now generally concluded to be a fifteenth-century forgery , but the motif proved influential among artists and landscape gardeners for several centuries after, with copies seen at neoclassical gardens such as the grotto at Stourhead .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] List [ edit ] All the names for various classes of nymphs have plural feminine adjectives, most agreeing with the substantive numbers and groups of nymphai. There is no single adopted classification that could be seen as canonical and exhaustive.

[ 22 ] Some classes of nymphs tend to overlap, which complicates the task of precise classification. e.g.

dryads and hamadryads as nymphs of trees generally, meliai as nymphs of ash trees .

[ 22 ] According to classicist Robin Hard, these terms "were hardly proper names at all, but feminine adjectives that could be assigned to the noun nymphē at will", adding that "[n]o orthodox or exhaustive classification of such beings was ever attempted, and ancient authors were often careless or arbitrary in the application of such titles".

[ 23 ] By dwelling or affinity [ edit ] The following is not the authentic Greek classification, but is intended as a guide: Type / Group / Individuals Location Relations and Notes Celestial nymphs Aurae (breezes) also called Aetae or Pnoae, [ citation needed ] daughters of Boreas [ 24 ] Hesperides (evening) Far West nymphs of the sunset, the West, and the evening; daughters of Atlas; also had attributes of the Hamadryads [ 25 ] • Aegle • Arethusa • Erytheia (or Eratheis) mother of Eurytion by Ares [ 26 ] Hyades (star cluster; sent rain) Boeotia (probably) daughters of Atlas by either Pleione or Aethra [ 27 ] Pleiades daughters of Atlas and Pleione; [ 28 ] constellation; also were classed as Oreads • Maia Mt. Cyllene, Arcadia partner of Zeus and mother of Hermes [ 29 ] • Electra Mt. Saon, Samothrace mother of Dardanus and Iasion by Zeus [ 30 ] • Taygete Taygetos Mts., Laconia mother of Lacedaemon by Zeus [ 31 ] • Alcyone Mt. Cithaeron, Boeotia mother of Hyperes and Anthas by Poseidon [ 32 ] • Celaeno Mt. Cithaeron, Boeotia or Euboea mother of Lycus and Nycteus by Poseidon [ 33 ] • Asterope Pisa, Elis mother of Oenomaus by Ares [ 34 ] • Merope Corinth wife of Sisyphus and mother of Glaucus [ 35 ] Nephele (clouds) daughters of Oceanus [ 36 ] and/or Tethys [ 37 ] or of Aither [ 38 ] Land nymphs Alseides (groves) [ 39 ] Auloniades (valleys, see also Napaeae) [ 40 ] Leimonides (meadows) [ 41 ] Napaeae (dells, see also Auloniades) [ 42 ] Oreads (mountains, grottoes) , also Orodemniades Wood and plant nymphs Anthousai (flower nymphs) [ 43 ] Dryades (trees) Hamadryades or Hadryades Daphnaeae ( laurel tree) Epimeliades or Epimelides ( apple tree; also protected flocks) other name variants include Meliades, Maliades and Hamameliades; same as these are also the Boucolai (Pastoral Nymphs) Kissiae ( ivy ) Meliae (manna- ash tree ) born from the drops of blood that fell on Gaia when Cronus castrated Uranus [ 44 ] Hyleoroi (watchers of woods) Water nymphs ( Hydriades or Ephydriades ) Haliae (sea and seashores) Nereids Mediterranean Sea 50 daughters of Nereus and Doris [ 45 ] Naiads , Naides (fresh water) Crinaeae (fountains) 3.

Limnades , Limnatides (lakes) 4.

Pegaeae (springs) 5.

Potameides (rivers) Oceanids daughters of Oceanus and Tethys, [ 46 ] any freshwater, typically clouds and rain. see List of Oceanids Underworld nymphs • Orphne Hades is a representation of the darkness of the river Styx , the river of hatred, but is not to be confused with the goddess Styx herself nor with Nyx , goddess of night, despite being associated with both. She is the consort of Acheron , (the god of the river in Hades), and the mother of Ascalaphus , (the orchardist of Hades).

[ 47 ] • Leuce ( white poplar tree) daughter of Oceanus and lover of Hades [ 48 ] • Melinoe Orphic nymph, daughter of Persephone and "Zeus disguised as Pluto ".

[ 49 ] Her name is a possible epithet of Hecate .

• Minthe ( mint ) Cocytus River probably a daughter of Cocytus , lover of Hades and rival of Persephone [ 50 ] [ 51 ] Other nymphs Lampades torch bearers in the retinue of Hecate [ 52 ] Hecaterides (rustic dance) daughters of Hecaterus by a daughter of Phoroneus; sisters of the Dactyls and mothers of the Oreads and the Satyrs [ 53 ] Kabeirides daughters of Cadmilus and sisters of the Kabeiroi [ 54 ] or of Hephaestus and Cabeiro [ 55 ] Maenads or Bacchai or Bacchantes frenzied nymphs in the retinue of Dionysus Lenai (wine-press) Limnakides translated by Vian as "marsh nymphs" ( Nymphes des Marais ); older editions render their name as Limnaioi or Leimakides [ 56 ] Mimallones (music) Thyiai or Thyiades ( thyrsus bearers) Melissae (honey) likely a subgroup of Oreades or Epimelides By location [ edit ] The following is a list of individual nymphs or groups thereof associated with this or that particular location. Nymphs in such groups could belong to any of the classes mentioned above (Naiades, Oreades, and so on).

Groups and Individuals Location Relations and Notes Aeaean Nymphs Aeaea Island handmaidens of Circe Aegaeides Aegaeus River on the island of Scheria Aesepides Aesepus River in Anatolia • Abarbarea Acheloides Achelous River in Acarnania • Callirhoe , second wife of Alcmaeon Acmenes Stadium in Olympia , Elis Amnisiades Amnisos River on the island of Crete entered the retinue of Artemis Anigrides Anigros River in Elis believed to cure skin diseases Asopides Asopus River in Sicyonia and Boeotia • Aegina Island of Aegina mother of Menoetius by Actor , and Aeacus by Zeus • Asopis • Chalcis Chalcis , Euboea regarded as the mother of the Curetes and Corybantes ; perhaps the same as Combe and Euboea • Cleone Cleonae , Argos one of the daughters of Asopus • Combe Island of Euboea consort of Socus and mother by him of the seven Corybantes • Corcyra Island of Corcyra mother of Phaiax by Poseidon • Euboea Island of Euboea abducted by Poseidon; perhaps the same as Chalcis and Combe above • Harpina Pisa, Elis mother of Oenomaus by Ares • Ismene Ismenian spring of Thebes , Boeotia wife of Argus , eponymous king of Argus and thus, mother of Argus Panoptes and Iasus .

• Nemea Nemea , Argolis others called her the daughter of Zeus and Selene • Oeroe or Plataia Plataea , Boeotia carried off by Zeus • Ornea Ornia, Sicyon • Peirene Corinth others called her father to be Oebalus or Achelous by Poseidon she became the mother of Lecheas and Cenchrias • Salamis Island of Salamis mother of Cychreus by Poseidon • Sinope Sinope , Anatolia mother of Syrus by Apollo • Tanagra Tanagra , Boeotia mother of Leucippus and Ephippus by Poemander • Thebe Thebes, Boeotia wife of Zethus and also said to have consorted with Zeus • Thespeia Thespia , Boeotia abducted by Apollo Astakides Lake Astacus, Bithynia appeared in the myth of Nicaea • Nicaea Nicaea, Bithynia Asterionides Asterion River , Argos daughters of the river god Asterion ; nurses of the infant goddess Hera • Acraea • Euboea • Prosymna Carian Naiades ( Caria ) Caria • Salmacis Halicarnassus, Caria Nymphs of Ceos Island of Ceos Corycian Nymphs ( Corycian Cave ) Corycian cave , Delphi , Phocis daughters of the river god Pleistos • Kleodora (or Cleodora) Mt. Parnassus , Phocis mother of Parnassus by Poseidon • Corycia Corycian cave, Delphi, Phocis mother of Lycoreus by Apollo • Daphnis Mt. Parnassus , Phocis • Melaina Dephi, Phocis mother of Delphos by Apollo Cydnides River Cydnus in Cilicia Cyrenaean Nymphs City of Cyrene, Libya Cypriae Nymphs Island of Cyprus Cyrtonian Nymphs Town of Cyrtone, Boeotia Κυρτωνιαι Deliades Island of Delos daughters of Inopus , god of the river Inopus Dodonides Oracle at Dodona Erasinides Erasinos River, Argos daughters of the river god Erasinos ; attendants of the goddess Britomartis .

• Anchiroe • Byze • Maera • Melite Nymphs of the river Granicus River Granicus daughters of the river-god Granicus • Alexirhoe mother of Aesacus by Priam • Pegasis mother of Atymnios by Emathion Heliades River Eridanos daughters of Helios who were changed into trees Himeriai Naiades Local springs at the town of Himera , Sicily Hydaspides Hydaspes River , India nurses of infant Zagreus Idaean Nymphs Mount Ida , Crete nurses of infant Zeus • Ida • Adrasteia Inachides Inachos River , Argos daughters of the river god Inachus • Io mother of Epaphus by Zeus • Amymone • Philodice wife of Leucippus of Messenia by whom she became the mother of Hilaeira , Phoebe and possibly Arsinoe • Messeis • Hyperia • Mycene wife of Arestor and by him probably the mother of Argus Panoptes ; eponym of Mycenae Ionides Kytheros River in Elis daughters of the river god Cytherus • Calliphaea • Iasis • Pegaea • Synallaxis Ithacian Nymphs Local springs and caves on the island of Ithaca Ladonides Ladon River Lamides or Lamusides Lamos River in Cilicia possible nurses of infant Dionysus Leibethrides Mounts Helicon and Leibethrios in Boeotia ; or Mount Leibethros in Thrace ) • Libethrias • Petra Lelegeides Lycia , Anatolia Lycaean Nymphs Mount Lycaeus nurses of infant Zeus, perhaps a subgroup of the Oceanides Melian Nymphs Island of Melos transformed into frogs by Zeus; not to be confused with the Meliae (ash tree nymphs Mycalessides Mount Mycale in Caria , Anatolia Mysian Nymphs Spring of Pegai near Lake Askanios in Bithynia who abducted Hylas • Euneica • Malis • Nycheia Naxian Nymphs Mount Drios on the island of Naxos nurses of infant Dionysus; were syncretized with the Hyades • Cleide • Coronis • Philia Neaerides Thrinacia Island daughters of Helios and Neaera , watched over Helios' cattle Nymphaeides Nymphaeus River in Paphlagonia Nysiads Mount Nysa nurses of infant Dionysos , identified with Hyades Ogygian Nymphs Island of Ogygia four handmaidens of Calypso Ortygian Nymphs Local springs of Syracuse , Sicily named for the island of Ortygia Othreides Mount Othrys a local group of Hamadryads Pactolides Pactolus River • Euryanassa wife of Tantalus Pelionides Mount Pelion nurses of the Centaurs Phaethonides a synonym for the Heliades Phaseides Phasis River Rhyndacides Rhyndacus River in Mysia daughters of the river god Rhyndacus Sithnides Fountain at the town of Megara Spercheides River Spercheios one of them, Diopatra, was loved by Poseidon and the others were changed by him into trees Sphragitides, or Cithaeronides Mount Cithaeron Tagids, Tajids, Thaejids or Thaegids River Tagus in Portugal and Spain Thessalides Peneus River in Thessaly Thriae Mount Parnassos prophets and nurses of Apollo Trojan Nymphs Local springs of Troy Others [ edit ] The following is a selection of names of the nymphs whose class was not specified in the source texts. For lists of Naiads, Oceanids, Dryades etc., see respective articles.

Individual names of some of the nymphs Names Location Relations and Notes Alphesiboea India loved by Dionysus [ 57 ] Aora Crete eponym of the town Aoros in Crete [ 58 ] Areia daughter of Cleochus and mother of Miletus by Apollo [ 59 ] Axioche or Danais Elis mother of Chrysippus by Pelops [ 60 ] [ 61 ] Brettia Mysia eponym of Abrettene, Mysia [ 62 ] Brisa brought up the god Dionysus [ 63 ] Calybe Troy mother of Bucolion , Laomedon [ 64 ] Carmentis or Carmenta Arcadia She had a son with Hermes , called Evander . Her son was the founder of Pallantium , one of the cities that was merged later into ancient Rome .

[ 65 ] Chalcea mother of Olympus by Zeus [ 66 ] Chania a lover of Heracles Chariclo Thebes mother of Tiresias by Everes [ 67 ] Charidia mother of Alchanus by Zeus [ 66 ] Chryse Lemnos fell in love with Philoctetes [ 68 ] Cirrha Phocis eponym of Cirrha in Phocis [ 69 ] Clymene mother of Tlesimenes by Parthenopaeus [ 70 ] Cretheis briefly mentioned in Suda [ 71 ] Crimisa Italy eponym of a city in Italy [ 72 ] Deiopea one of Hera's nymphs who was promised to Aeolus [ 73 ] Dodone Dodona eponym of Dodona [ 74 ] Echemeia Cos spelled "Ethemea" by Hyginus , consort of Merops [ 75 ] Eidothea Mt. Othrys mother by Eusiros of Cerambus [ 76 ] Eunoë Phrygia possible mother of Hecuba by Dymas [ 77 ] Eunoste Boeotia (possibly) nurse of Eunostus [ 78 ] Euryte Athens mother of Halirrhothius by Poseidon [ 79 ] Harmonia Akmonian Wood, near Themiscyra mother of the Amazons by Ares [ 80 ] [ 81 ] Hegetoria Rhodes consort of Ochimus [ 82 ] Hemera mother of Iasion by Zeus Himalia Rhodes mother of Cronius , Spartaios , and Cytos by Zeus [ 83 ] Hyale belongs to the train of Artemis [ 84 ] Hyllis Argos possible eponym of the tribe Hylleis and the city Hylle [ 85 ] Idaea Crete mother of Cres [ 86 ] and Asterion [ 66 ] by Zeus Idaea Mt. Ida, Troad mother of Teucer by Scamander [ 87 ] Ithome Messenia one of the nurses of Zeus [ 88 ] Laodice Argolis (possibly) mother of Apis by Phoroneus [ citation needed ] Leucophryne Magnesia (possibly) priestess of Artemis Leucophryne Lotis pursued by Priapus and was changed into a tree that bears her name [ 89 ] Ma nymph in the suite of Rhea who nursed Zeus Melanippe Attica (possibly) married Itonus , son of Amphictyon [ 90 ] Melissa Crete nurse of Zeus [ 91 ] Mendeis Thrace consort of Sithon [ 92 ] Menodice daughter of Orion and mother of Hylas by Theiodamas [ 93 ] Methone Pieria mother of Oeagrus by King Pierus of Emathia [ 94 ] Myrmex Attica beloved companion of Athena whom she turned into an ant [ 95 ] Nacole Phrygia eponym of Nacoleia in Phrygia [ 96 ] Neaera Thrinacia mother of Lampetia and Phaethusa by Helios [ 97 ] Neaera mother of Aegle by Zeus [ citation needed ] Neaera Lydia mother of Dresaeus by Theiodamas [ 98 ] Nymphe Samothrace mother of Saon by Zeus [ 99 ] Oeneis mother of Pan by Hermes [ 100 ] Oinoie Sicinus mother of Sicinus by Thoas [ 101 ] Olbia Bithynia mother of Astacus by Poseidon [ 102 ] Paphia possibly the mother of Cinyras by Eurymedon [ 103 ] Pareia Paros mother of four sons by Minos [ 104 ] Polydora one of the Danaïdes [ 105 ] Pyronia mother of Iasion by Minos Psalacantha Icaria changed into a plant by Dionysus [ 106 ] Rhene Mt. Cyllene, Arcadia consorted with Oileus [ 107 ] Semestra Thrace nurse of Keroessa [ 108 ] Teledice Argolis (possibly) a consort of Phoroneus [ 109 ] Thalia Sicily mother of the Palici by Zeus [ 110 ] Thisbe Boeotia eponym of the town of Thisbe [ 111 ] Tithorea Mt. Parnassus, Phocis eponym of the town of Tithorea (previously called Neon) [ 112 ] In non-Greek tales influenced by Greek mythology [ edit ] Sabrina (the river Severn ) Tágides ( Tagus River) Gallery [ edit ] Hylas and nymphs from a mosaic in Roman Gaul (3rd century) Fight between Nymph and Satyr , Naples National Archaeological Museum The Nymph of the Spring by Lucas Cranach the Elder National Gallery of Art ( c.

1537 ) Nymphe and Satyr by Nicolas Poussin - Pushkin Museum , Moscow (between 1626 and 1628) A Sleeping Nymph Watched by a Shepherd by Angelica Kauffman (about 1780, V&A Museum no. 23–1886) Satyr and nymph by Konstantin Makovsky (1864) Nymphs and Satyr by William-Adolphe Bouguereau (1873) The Pleiades by Elihu Vedder (1885) A naiad by Luis Ricardo Falero (1892) The Souls of Acheron by Adolf Hirémy-Hirschl (1898) Young oread , on German porcelain plate (late 19th century) The Cave of the Storm Nymphs by Sir Edward John Poynter (1903) Echo , an Oread (mountain nymph) watches Narcissus in this 1903 painting of Echo and Narcissus by John William Waterhouse Nymph with morning glory flowers by Jules Joseph Lefebvre La Nymphe de la Foret by Guillaume Seignac See also [ edit ] Animism Apsaras Dryad Fairy Houri Kami Mimi Naiad Nereid Nunnehi Nymphaeum Pitsa panels Plant soul Rå Xian Vila Yakshini Zana List of Greek deities Notes [ edit ] ^ Larson 2001 , p. 5.

^ Larson 2001 , p. 11, 71.

^ Brill's New Pauly , s.v. Nymphs.

^ a b Grimal 1996 , pp. 313–314.

^ Larson 2001 , p. 4.

^ Parad, Carlos; Förlag, Maicar (1997).

"Genealogical Guide to Greek Mythology: Nymphs" . Astrom Editions . Retrieved 25 May 2019 .

^ "Online Etymology Dictionary" .

etymonline.com .

^ Larson, Jennifer (1997). "Handmaidens of Artemis?".

The Classical Journal .

92 (3): 249– 257.

JSTOR 3298110 .

^ Lawson, John Cuthbert (1910).

Modern Greek Folklore and Ancient Greek Religion (1st ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . p.

131 .

^ Lee, D. Demetracopoulou (1936).

"Folklore of the Greeks in America" .

Folklore .

47 (3): 294– 310.

doi : 10.1080/0015587X.1936.9718647 .

JSTOR 1256865 .

^ "Heathen Artemis yielded her functions to her own genitive case transformed into Saint Artemidos", as Terrot Reaveley Glover phrased it in discussing the "practical polytheism in the worship of the saints", in Progress in Religion to the Christian Era 1922:107.

^ Tomkinson, John L. (2004).

Haunted Greece: Nymphs, Vampires and Other Exotika (1st ed.). Athens: Anagnosis. chapter 3.

ISBN 978-960-88087-0-6 .

^ Kready, Laura (1916).

A Study of Fairy Tales . Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.

^ Briggs, Katharine Mary (1976). "Euphemistic names for fairies".

An Encyclopedia of Fairies . New York: Pantheon Books.

ISBN 0-394-73467-X .

^ "The Nymph of the Spring" .

National Gallery of Art . Retrieved 23 September 2016 .

^ Stephen John Campbell (2004).

The Cabinet of Eros: Renaissance Mythological Painting and the Studiolo of Isabella D'Este . Yale University Press. pp.

95– 6.

ISBN 978-0-300-11753-0 .

^ Maryan Wynn Ainsworth; Joshua P. Waterman; Dorothy Mahon (2013).

German Paintings in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1350-1600 . Metropolitan Museum of Art. pp.

95– 6.

ISBN 978-1-58839-487-3 .

^ Jay A. Levenson; National Gallery of Art (U.S.) (1991).

Circa 1492: Art in the Age of Exploration . Yale University Press. p. 260.

ISBN 978-0-300-05167-4 .

^ Leonard Barkan (1999).

Unearthing the Past: Archaeology and Aesthetics in the Making of Renaissance Culture . Yale University Press. pp.

237– 8.

ISBN 978-0-300-08911-0 .

^ Elisabeth B. MacDougall (January 1994).

Fountains, Statues, and Flowers: Studies in Italian Gardens of the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries . Dumbarton Oaks. pp.

37– 56.

ISBN 978-0-88402-216-9 .

^ Kenneth Gross (1992).

The Dream of the Moving Statue . Cornell University Press. pp.

170 –175.

ISBN 978-0-8014-2702-2 .

^ a b Rose, Herbert Jennings (1959).

A Handbook of Greek Mythology (1st ed.). New York: E. P. Dutton. p.

173 .

ISBN 978-0-525-47041-0 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Hard, p. 210.

^ Quintus Smyrnaeus , 1.683 ff.

^ Diodorus Siculus , 4.26.2 ^ Stesichorus , Geryoneis Frag S8 ^ Hyginus , Fabulae 192 ^ Apollodorus , 3.10.1 ^ Hesiod , Theogony 938 ^ Apollodorus, 3.12.1 ^ Hyginus , Fabulae 155 ^ Pausanias , 2.30.8 ^ Apollodorus, 3.10.1 ^ Hyginus, Fabulae 84 ^ Hyginus, Astronomica 2.21 ^ Aristophanes , Clouds 264 ^ Orphic Hymn 22 ^ Aristophanes, Clouds 563 ^ Homer, Iliad 20.4 ^ Montanari, s.v. αὐλωνιάς, p. 338; Orphic Hymns 51.7 (Ricciardelli, pp. 134, 135).

^ Malkin, Irad (2016). "Nymphs".

Oxford Classical Dictionary .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199381135.013.4487 .

ISBN 978-0-19-938113-5 .

^ Statius, Thebaid 9.385 ^ Philostratus the Elder , Imagines 2.11.

^ Hesiod , Theogony 182–187 ^ Hesiod, Theogony 240–262 ^ Hesiod, Theogony 365–366 ^ Ovid, Metamorphoses 5.539 ff ^ Servius , Commentary on Virgil's Aeneid 7.61 ^ Orphic Hymn 71 ^ Oppian , Halieutica 3.485 ff ^ Strabo, 8.3.14 ^ Scholia minora on Homer 's Iliad , 6.21 [= Alcman , fr. 63 Campbell, pp. 438, 439 = fr. 63 PMG (Page, p. 53)].

^ Strabo, 10.3.19 ^ Acusilaus Frag as cited in Strabo, 10.3.21 ^ Strabo, 10.3.21 citing Pherecydes ^ Vian, commentary on line 646, p. 120; Orphic Argonautica 646 (Vian, p. 120).

^ Pseudo-Plutarch , De fluviis 24 ^ Stephanus of Byzantium , Ethnica s.v.

Aōros ^ Apollodorus, 3.1.2 ^ Scholia on Euripides , Orestes , 4; on Pindar , Olympian Ode 1.144 ^ Plutarch , Parallela minora 33 ^ Stephanus of Byzantium , s.v.

Abrettēnē ^ Schol. ad Pers. Sat. i. 76.

^ Apollodorus, 3.12.3 ^ "Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Roman Antiquities, 2.1" .

^ a b c Pseudo-Clement , Recognitions 10.21–23 ^ Apollodorus, 3.6.7 ^ Sophocles , Philoctetes 1327 ^ Pausanias , 10.37.5 ^ Hyginus , Fabulae 71 ^ Suida , s.v.

Kretheus ^ Stephanus of Byzantium , s.v.

Krimisa ^ Virgil , Aeneid 1.71-75 ^ Stephanus of Byzantium, s.v.

Dodone ^ Hyginus , Astronomica 2.16.2 ^ Antoninus Liberalis , 22 vs Cerambus ^ Scholia on Homer's Iliad 16. 718 with Pherecydes as the authority ^ Plutarch , Quaestiones Graecae 40 ^ Apollodorus, 3.14.2 ^ "Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica, Book 2" .

^ "ARGONAUTICA BOOK 2" .

^ Diodorus Siculus , 5.57.7 ^ Diodorus Siculus, 5.55.5 ^ Ovid , Metamorphoses 3.155 ^ Stephanus of Byzantium, s.v.

Hylleis ^ Stephanus of Byzantium, s.v.

Krētē ^ Apollodorus, 3.12.1 ^ Pausanias, 4.33.1 ^ Ovid , Fasti 1.416 & 1.423 ; Metamorphoses , 9.347 ^ Pausanias, 9.1.1 ^ Lactantius , Divine Institutes 1.22.3 ^ Conon , Narrations 10 ^ Hyginus , Fabulae 14 ^ Of the Origin of Homer and Hesiod and their Contest, Fragment 1.

Translated by Evelyn-White.

^ William Smith .

A Dictionary of Greek and Roman biography and mythology s.v.

Myrmex ^ Suida, s.v.

Nakoleia ^ Homer , Odyssey 12.133 ff ^ Quintus Smyrnaeus , 1.290–291 ^ Dionysius of Halicarnassus , Antiquitates Romanae 1.61.3 ^ Scholiast ad Theocritus , 1.3 ^ Apollonius Rhodius , Argonautica 1.620 ff with scholia on 1.623 ^ Stephanus of Byzantium, s.v.

Astakos ^ Scholia on Pindar , Pythian Ode 2.28 ^ Apollodorus, 3.1.2 ^ Antoninus Liberalis , 32 ^ Ptolemy Hephaestion , New History 5 in Photius , Myrobiblion 190 ^ Homer , Iliad 2.728 ^ "Dionysius of Byzantium, Anaplous of the Bosporos, §24" .

^ Apollodorus, 2.1.1 ^ Macrobius , Saturnalia 5.19.15 ^ Pausanias, 9.32.3 ^ Pausanias, 10.32.9 References [ edit ] Burkert, Walter (1985).

Greek Religion (1st ed.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-36281-9 .

Brill's New Pauly : Encyclopaedia of the Ancient World. Antiquity, Volume 9 , Mini – Obe, edited by Hubert Cancik and Helmuth Schneider, Brill, 2006.

ISBN 9004122729 .

Campbell, David A., Greek Lyric, Volume II: Anacreon, Anacreontea, Choral Lyric from Olympus to Alcman , Loeb Classical Library No. 143, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press , 1988.

ISBN 978-0-674-99158-3 .

Online version at Harvard University Press .

Internet Archive .

Grimal, Pierre (1996).

The Dictionary of Classical Mythology . Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-0-631-20102-1 .

Hard, Robin, The Routledge Handbook of Greek Mythology: Based on H.J. Rose's "Handbook of Greek Mythology" , London and New York, Routledge, 2004.

ISBN 020344633X .

doi : 10.4324/9780203446331 .

Larson, Jennifer (2001).

Greek Nymphs: Myth, Cult, Lore . New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-514465-9 .

Lawson, John Cuthbert (1910).

Modern Greek Folklore and Ancient Greek Religion . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 131.

Montanari, Franco, The Brill Dictionary of Ancient Greek , edited by Madeleine Goh and Chad Schroeder, Leiden, Brill, 2015.

ISBN 978-90-04-19318-5 .

Page, Denys Lionel, Sir , Poetae Melici Graeci , Oxford University Press, 1962.

ISBN 978-0-198-14333-8 .

Philostratus the Elder , Imagines , in Philostratus the Elder, Imagines. Philostratus the Younger, Imagines. Callistratus, Descriptions , translated by Arthur Fairbanks , Loeb Classical Library No. 256, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press , 1931.

ISBN 978-06-749-9282-5 .

Harvard University Press .

Ricciardelli, Gabriella, Inni Orfici , Fondazione Lorenzo Valla, 2000.

ISBN 978-8-804-47661-0 .

Tomkinson, John L. (2004).

Haunted Greece: Nymphs, Vampires and Other Exotika (1st ed.). Athens: Anagnosis.

ISBN 978-960-88087-0-6 .

Vian, Francis, Les Argonautiques orphiques , Collection Budé , Paris, Les Belles Lettres , 2003.

ISBN 978-2-251-00389-4 .

External links [ edit ] The Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (images of Nymphs) The dictionary definition of nymph at Wiktionary Media related to Nymphs at Wikimedia Commons v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Religion and religious practice Main beliefs Ages of Man Golden Age Heroic Age Ancient accounts of Homer Apotheosis Arete Daemon Destiny Eudaimonia Euhemerism Eunoia Eusebeia Golden mean Golden Rule Greek words for love Hemitheos Hero cult Hubris Interpretatio graeca Katabasis Kleos Know thyself Metamorphosis Metempsychosis Nympholepsy Paradoxography Patron gods Pederasty Phronesis Polytheism Sophrosyne Soter Theia mania Xenia Texts / odes / epic poems Epic Cycle Aethiopis Cypria Iliad Iliupersis Little Iliad Nostoi Odyssey Telegony Theban Cycle Oedipodea Thebaid Epigoni Alcmeonis Others Aesop's Fables Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Catalogue of Women Cyranides Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Golden Verses of Pythagoras Greek Magical Papyri Homerica Homeric Hymns Interpretation of Dreams Oneirocritica Orphic Hymns Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Sortes Astrampsychi Stories from Plato Atlantis Myth of Er Ring of Gyges Theogony Works and Days Religions Antecedents Minoan religion Mycenaean religion List of Mycenaean deities Paleo-Balkan mythology Proto-Indo-European mythology Religions of the ancient Near East Expressions Atheism Henotheism Monotheism Polytheism Hellenistic religions Early Christianity Christianization Relationship with Greek philosophy Esoteric systems Early alchemy Gnosticism Hermeticism Neoplatonism Hellenistic Judaism God-fearers Syncretic religions Alexander Ptolemaic cult Etruscan religion Greco-Buddhism Roman religion Imperial cult Religious views of emperor Julian Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Arcadian Mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Orphism Samothracian Mysteries New religious movements Discordianism Feraferia Gaianism Hellenism Religious practice Worship / rituals Amphidromia Arotoi Hieroi Astragalomancy Baptes Cult of Artemis at Brauron Daduchos Divination Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Greco-Roman mysteries Hero cult Heroön Hierophany Hieros gamos Hymns Incubation Komos Nekyia Omophagia Orgia Panegyris Prayer Sacrifice Animal sacrifice Hecatomb Holocaust Libation Pharmakos Votive offering Theatre Religious offices Amphictyonic league Archon basileus Basilinna Gerarai Hiereia Hierophant Hierophylakes Iatromantis Kanephoros Mystagogue Oracle Sibyl Thiasus Religious objects Baetyl Cult image Chryselephantine sculpture Xoanon Greek terracotta figurines Kernos Kykeon Loutrophoros Omphalos Panathenaic amphora Rhyton Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Thymiaterion Magic Apotropaic magic Curse tablet Divination Greek Magical Papyri Hermeticism Hermetica Necromancy Philia Events Festivals / feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Halieia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Leucophryna Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Ptolemaieia Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Heraean Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Actia Sacred places Temples / sanctuaries Asclepieion Delphinion Mithraeum Necromanteion of Acheron Nymphaeum Panionium Parthenon Ploutonion Telesterion Temenos Temple of Artemis, Ephesus Temple of Zeus, Olympia Oracles Amphiareion of Oropos Aornum Claros Delphi Didyma Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Apollo at Ptoion Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros Oracle of Menestheus Sanctuary of the Great Gods Tegyra Mountains Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Caves of Pan Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Island of Achilles Delos Islands of Diomedes Springs Castalian Spring Hippocrene Pierian Spring Others Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Theatre of Dionysus Myths and mythology Deities ( Family tree ) Primordial deities Aether Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Water deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Proteus River gods Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Charon Hermes Hermanubis Thanatos Angelos Cabeiri The Erinyes (Furies) Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Melinoë Persephone Zagreus Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Darrhon Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Pasiphaë Art and beauty deities Aphrodite Apollo The Charites (Graces) Aglaea Euphrosyne Thalia Dionysus The Muses Calliope Clio Polyhymnia Euterpe Terpsichore Erato Melpomene Thalia Urania Other major deities The Anemoi (Winds) Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Azone Chrysaor Cybele Eileithyia Glycon Harmonia Nemesis Pan Pegasus Zelus Heroes / heroines Individuals Abderus Achilles Actaeon Adonis Aeneas Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Polydeuces) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Menelaus Narcissus Nestor Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Otrera Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Groups Argonauts Calydonian hunters Epigoni Seven against Thebes Oracles / seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyls Cimmerian Cumaean Delphic Erythraean Hellespontine Libyan Persian Phrygian Samian Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Other mortals Aegeus Aegisthus Agamemnon Andromache Andromeda Antigone Augeas Briseis Cassiopeia Creon of Thebes Chryseis Chrysothemis Clytemnestra Damocles Deidamia Deucalion Electra Eteocles Europa Gordias Hecuba Helen of Troy Hellen The Heracleidae Hermione Hippolyta Io Iphigenia Ismene Jocasta Laius Lycian peasants Lycaon The Maenads Memnon Messapian shepherds Midas Minos Myrrha Neoptolemus Niobe Orestes Paris Patroclus Penelope Philomela Phoenix Polybus of Corinth Polynices Priam Procne Pylades Pyrrha Telemachus Troilus Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Necromanteion (necromancy temple) Necromanteion of Acheron Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Isles of the Blessed Mourning Fields Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Residents Anticlea Danaïdes Eurydice Ixion Ocnus Salmoneus The Shades Sisyphus Tantalus Tiresias Titans Tityos Visitors Dionysus Heracles Hermes Odysseus Orpheus Pirithous Psyche Theseus Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Charon's obol Animals, daemons, and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Menoetius Mythical Beings Lists Deities Mythological creatures Mortals Minor figures Trojan War characters Minor spirits Daemon Agathodaemon Cacodaemon Eudaemon Nymph Satyr Beasts / creatures Centaur Centaurides Ichthyocentaur Cyclops Dragon Drakaina Echidna Giant Gorgon Harpy Hecatonchires Hippocampus Horses of Helios Lamia Phoenix Python Siren Scylla and Charybdis Sphinx Typhon Captured / slain by heroes Calydonian boar Cerberus Cerynian Hind Chimera Cretan Bull Crommyonian Sow Erymanthian boar Khalkotauroi Lernaean Hydra Mares of Diomedes Medusa Minotaur Nemean lion Orthrus Polyphemus Stymphalian birds Talos Teumessian fox Tribes Achaeans Amazons Anthropophagi Bebryces Cicones Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Laestrygonians Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Spartoi Telchines Places / Realms Aethiopia Ara Colchis Erytheia Hyperborea Ismarus Ithaca Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Phlegra Scheria Scythia Symplegades Tartessos Themiscyra Thrinacia Troy Events Apollo and Daphne Calydonian boar hunt Eros and Psyche Judgment of Paris Labours of Heracles Orpheus and Eurydice Returns from Troy Odyssey Wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Gigantomachy Indian War Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Argo Dragon's teeth Diipetes Eidolon Galatea Girdle of Aphrodite Golden apple Golden Fleece Gordian knot Harpe Ichor Labyrinth Lotus tree Milk of Hera Moly Necklace of Harmonia Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos ( Winged helmet ) Phaeacian ships Philosopher's stone Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thyrsus Trident of Poseidon Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of fire Symbols Bowl of Hygieia Caduceus Cornucopia Gorgoneion Kantharos Labrys Orphic egg Ouroboros Owl of Athena Phallus Rod of Asclepius Swan song Wind East West North South Modern treatments Classical mythology in western art and literature Classicism Classics Greek mythology in popular culture Modern understanding of Greek mythology v t e Fairies in folklore Classifications of fairies Related articles Álfheimr Changeling Elfshot Elves in fiction Middle-earth Fairy godmother Fairy-lock Fairy painting Fairy riding Fairy tale List Fairy Tale (color) Familiar Genius loci Household deity Hungry grass Nature spirit Sacred trees and groves Celtic Germanic Tutelary deity Water spirit Abodes and structures Fairy fort Fairyland Fairy path Fairy ring Attested fairies A–E Adhene Aibell Alp Luachra Anjana Aos Sí (Aes Sídhe) Arkan Sonney Asrai Baobhan sith Banshee Barghest Bean nighe Billy Blind Biróg Bloody Bones Bluecap Blue men of the Minch Bodach Boggart Bogle Boobrie Brag Brownie Brown Man of the Muirs Bucca Buggane Bugbear Bugul Noz Caoineag Cat sìth Cù Sìth Ceffyl Dŵr Clíodhna Clurichaun Coblynau Colt pixie Cyhyraeth Drude Duende Duergar Dullahan Dunnie Each-uisge Elf Alp Dökkálfar and Ljósálfar Elegast Erlking Half-elf Huldufólk Queen of Elphame Svartálfar F–L Fachan Fairy Queen Fear dearg Fear gorta Fenodyree Finfolk Finvarra Fuath Gancanagh Ghillie Dhu Glaistig Glashtyn Groac'h Grindylow Gwragedd Annwn Gwyllion Gwyn ap Nudd Habetrot Hag Haltija The Hedley Kow Heinzelmännchen Hinzelmann Hob Hobbididance Hobgoblin Hödekin Iannic-ann-ôd Jack-o'-lantern Jack o' the bowl Jenny Greenteeth Joan the Wad Joint-eater Kelpie Kilmoulis Knocker Knucker Kobold Klabautermann Korrigan Lady of the Lake Lazy Laurence Leanan sídhe Leprechaun Lubber fiend Lutin Ly Erg M–Z Mare Margot the fairy Meg Mullach Melusine Merrow Mooinjer veggey Morgen Morvarc'h Moss people Nain Rouge Nelly Longarms Nicnevin/Gyre-Carling Nisse Nixie Nuckelavee Nuggle Oberon Peg Powler Pillywiggin Pixie Púca/Pwca Puck Rå Bergsrå Hulder Radande Sjörå Skogsrå Redcap Schrat Sebile Selkie Seonaidh Shellycoat Sleih beggey Sluagh Spriggan Sprite/Water sprite Sylph Titania Tomte Tooth fairy Trow Tylwyth Teg Undine Water bull Water horse Wicked fairy Wight Will-o'-the-wisp Wirry-cow Xana Yallery Brown Yan-gant-y-tan Fairy-like beings worldwide Worldwide Bogeyman Crone Demon Humanoid Little people Merfolk Mermaid Merman UFO Vampire Africa Abatwa Asanbosam Aziza Bultungin Eloko Jengu Kishi Mami Wata Obayifo Rompo Simbi Tikoloshe Yumboes Americas Alux Anchimayen Caipora Canotila Chaneque Christmas elf Chullachaqui Curupira Encantado Fastachee Fearsome critters Grey alien Hopkinsville Goblins Ishigaq Jogah Little green men Muki Nimerigar Nordic alien Nûñnë'hï Pombero Pukwudgie Saci Trauco Yunwi Tsunsdi Asia Diwata Dokkaebi Fallen angel Fox spirit Hồ ly tinh Huli jing Huxian Inari Ōkami Kitsune Kumiho Hyang Irshi Jinn Ifrit Kijimuna Korpokkur Mazzikin Mogwai Mrenh kongveal Orang bunian Peri Preta Hungry ghost Tennin Yaksha / Yakshini Yōkai Yōsei Oceania Bunyip Manaia Menehune Mimis Muldjewangk Nawao Patupaiarehe Ponaturi Taniwha Tipua Wandjina Yara-ma-yha-who Europe Eastern Bannik Căpcăun Domovoy Iele Karzełek Kikimora Leshy Lidérc Likho Ovinnik Polevik Rübezahl Rusalka Samodiva Sânziană Siren Spiriduș Ursitory Vadleany Vâlvă Vântoase Vodyanoy Zână Northern Aitvaras Ajatar Badb Black dog Ent Gabija Gremlin Haltija Headless Horseman Hiisi Hobbit Jack Frost Jimmy Squarefoot Lauma Menninkäinen Morgan Le Fay Pictish Beast Troll Tuatha Dé Danann Southern Basajaun Centaur Cercopes Circe Dionysus Doñas de fuera Farfadet Faun Hecate Hippocampus Kallikantzaros Kobalos Lamina Mairu Mouro Enchanted Moura Nymph List Pan Satyr Silenus Siren Squasc Thiasus Trenti Vila Western Dames blanches Dusios Dwarf Imp Lorelei Perchta Venus in German legend Vittra Witte Wieven / Weiße Frauen Cross-regional Christmas gift-bringer Santa Claus Companions of Elemental Fates Goblin Gnome Ogre Salamander Sandman Wild man See also List of hybrid creatures in folklore List of beings referred to as fairies Category v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Accidental travel Action-adventure Lost world Sword and sorcery Wuxia Alternate history Chuanyue Contemporary Children's fantasy Comedy Bangsian Dark fantasy Grimdark Fairy tale parodies Fairytale fantasy Fantastique Fantasy of manners Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai LitRPG Low fantasy Magical girl Mythic Mythpunk Mythopoeia Omegaverse Progression Romantic Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Shenmo Urban fantasy Occult detective fiction Paranormal romance Weird fiction New weird Weird West Fantasy Western Xianxia Media Film and television Anime Films highest-grossing S&S Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels A–H I–R S–Z List of story collections Publishers Magazines Fantastic Fantastic Adventures Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Other Dungeons & Dragons Féeries Podcasts Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Saturn Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Fandom Art Fanspeak Filk music Harry Potter fandom The Inklings Lovecraft fandom Mythopoeic Society Tolkien fandom Tolkien's influence Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Devils Ghouls Elementals Faeries Familiars Fire-breathing monsters Chimera Dragons Gargoyles Imps Jinn Nymphs Shapeshifters Werecats Werewolves Skin-walkers Spirits Talking animals Undead Death Ghosts Liches Mummies Skeletons Vampires Zombies Unicorns Yōkai Characters Barbarian Caveman Damsel in distress Dark lord Donor Dragonslayer Fairy godmother Heroes Magicians Occult detective list Wild man Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / neutral / light Ceremonial Love Moon Magic item Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Runes Wand Schools Alchemy Demonology Divination Egregore Evocation Incantation Necromancy Runecraft Shamanism Shapeshifting Thaumaturgy Theurgy Witchcraft Fantasy races Centaurs Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Kobolds Leprechauns Merfolk Mermaids Mermen Ogres Oni Orcs Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Maps Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Magic school Related Allegory Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Ghost stories Gothic fiction Horror fiction LGBT themes in speculative fiction Mecha Mythology Science fiction Supernatural fiction Superhero Tokusatsu Kaiju Urban legend Outline Category Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐tq5fg
Cached time: 20250817043611
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.233 seconds
Real time usage: 1.523 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6254/1000000
Revision size: 47049/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 481825/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4734/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 198049/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.613/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24551335/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1026.845      1 -total
 22.76%  233.732      1 Template:Reflist
 22.03%  226.207     29 Template:Navbox
 10.66%  109.504      1 Template:Langx
 10.22%  104.952     16 Template:Cite_book
 10.16%  104.330      7 Template:Cite_web
  9.92%  101.900      1 Template:Greek_deities_(nymphs)
  9.74%  100.030      1 Template:Sidebar
  8.17%   83.916      1 Template:Greek_religion
  6.17%   63.338      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:22058:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043611 and revision id 1306197924. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nymph&oldid=1306197924 " Categories : Nymphs Elementals Greek legendary creatures Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages with Attic Greek IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 12:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nymph 77 languages Add topic

