Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Causes Toggle Causes subsection 1.1 Pesticides and herbicides 1.2 Agents of war 2 Human health Toggle Human health subsection 2.1 Exposure pathways 2.2 Consequences 3 Ecosystem effects Toggle Ecosystem effects subsection 3.1 Potential effects of contaminants to soil functions 4 Cleanup options 5 By country Toggle By country subsection 5.1 People's Republic of China 5.2 European Union 5.3 United Kingdom 5.4 Canada 5.5 India 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Soil contamination 63 languages Afrikaans العربية অসমীয়া Asturianu বাংলা भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Монгол Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Occitan پښتو Polski Português Русский संस्कृतम् Shqip سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pollution of land by human-made chemicals or other alteration Excavation showing soil contamination at a disused gasworks in England Part of a series on Pollution Air pollution from a factory Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Soil contamination , soil pollution , or land pollution as a part of land degradation is caused by the presence of xenobiotic (human-made) chemicals or other alteration in the natural soil environment.  It is typically caused by industrial activity, agricultural chemicals or improper disposal of waste . The most common chemicals involved are petroleum hydrocarbons , polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (such as naphthalene and benzo(a)pyrene ), solvents , pesticides, lead , and other heavy metals .

[ 1 ] Contamination is correlated with the degree of industrialization and intensity of chemical substance. The concern over soil contamination stems primarily from health risks, from direct contact with the contaminated soil, vapour from the contaminants, or from secondary contamination of water supplies within and underlying the soil.

[ 2 ] Mapping of contaminated soil sites and the resulting clean ups are time-consuming and expensive tasks, and require expertise in geology , hydrology , chemistry , computer modelling , and GIS in Environmental Contamination , as well as an appreciation of the history of industrial chemistry.

[ 3 ] In North America and South-Western Europe the extent of contaminated land is best known for as many of the countries in these areas having a legal framework to identify and deal with this environmental problem.  Developing countries tend to be less tightly regulated despite some of them having undergone significant industrialization .

Causes [ edit ] Soil pollution can be caused by the following (non-exhaustive list): Microplastics Oil spills Mining and activities by other heavy industries Accidental spills may happen during activities, etc.

Corrosion of underground storage tanks (including piping used to transmit the contents) Acid rain Intensive farming Agrochemicals , such as pesticides , herbicides and fertilizers Petrochemicals Industrial accidents Road debris Construction activities Exterior lead-based paints Drainage of contaminated surface water into the soil Ammunitions , chemical agents , and other agents of war Waste disposal Oil and fuel dumping Nuclear wastes Direct discharge of industrial wastes to the soil Discharge of sewage Landfill and illegal dumping Coal ash Electronic waste Contaminated by rocks containing large amounts of toxic elements.

Contaminated by Pb due to vehicle exhaust , Cd , and Zn caused by tire wear.

Contamination by strengthening air pollutants by incineration of fossil raw materials.

The most common chemicals involved are petroleum hydrocarbons , solvents , pesticides, lead , and other heavy metals .

Any activity that leads to other forms of soil degradation ( erosion , compaction , etc.) may indirectly worsen the contamination effects in that soil remediation becomes more tedious.

E-waste processing in Agbogbloshie , Ghana. Improper disposal of manufactured goods and industrial wastes, often means that communities in the global south have to process goods. Especially without proper protections, heavy metals and other contaminates can seep into the soil, and create water pollution and air pollution .

Historical deposition of coal ash used for residential, commercial, and industrial heating, as well as for industrial processes such as ore smelting , were a common source of contamination in areas that were industrialized before about 1960. Coal naturally concentrates lead and zinc during its formation, as well as other heavy metals to a lesser degree. When the coal is burned, most of these metals become concentrated in the ash (the principal exception being mercury). Coal ash and slag may contain sufficient lead to qualify as a "characteristic hazardous waste ", defined in the US as containing more than 5 mg/L of extractable lead using the TCLP procedure. In addition to lead, coal ash typically contains variable but significant concentrations of polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs; e.g., benzo(a)anthracene, benzo(b)fluoranthene, benzo(k)fluoranthene, benzo(a)pyrene, indeno(cd)pyrene, phenanthrene, anthracene, and others). These PAHs are known human carcinogens and the acceptable concentrations of them in soil are typically around 1 mg/kg. Coal ash and slag can be recognised by the presence of off-white grains in soil, gray heterogeneous soil, or (coal slag) bubbly, vesicular pebble-sized grains.

Treated sewage sludge , known in the industry as biosolids , has become controversial as a " fertilizer ". As it is the byproduct of sewage treatment, it generally contains more contaminants such as organisms, pesticides, and heavy metals than other soil.

[ 4 ] In the European Union, the Urban Waste Water Treatment Directive allows sewage sludge to be sprayed onto land. The volume is expected to double to 185,000 tons of dry solids in 2005. This has good agricultural properties due to the high nitrogen and phosphate content. In 1990/1991, 13% wet weight was sprayed onto 0.13% of the land; however, this is expected to rise 15 fold by 2005.

[ needs update ] Advocates [ who?

] say there is a need to control this so that pathogenic microorganisms do not get into water courses and to ensure that there is no accumulation of heavy metals in the top soil.

[ 5 ] Pesticides and herbicides [ edit ] A pesticide is a substance used to kill a pest. A pesticide may be a chemical substance, biological agent (such as a virus or bacteria), antimicrobial, disinfectant or device used against any pest. Pests include insects, plant pathogens, weeds, mollusks, birds, mammals, fish, nematodes (roundworms) and microbes that compete with humans for food, destroy property, spread or are a vector for disease or cause a nuisance. Although there are benefits to the use of pesticides, there are also drawbacks, such as potential toxicity to humans and other organisms.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Herbicides are used to kill weeds, especially on pavements and railways. They are similar to auxins and most are biodegradable by soil bacteria. However, one group derived from trinitrotoluene (2:4 D and 2:4:5 T) have the impurity dioxin, which is very toxic and causes fatality even in low concentrations. Another herbicide is Paraquat . It is highly toxic but it rapidly degrades in soil due to the action of bacteria and does not kill soil fauna.

[ 8 ] Insecticides are used to rid farms of pests which damage crops. The insects damage not only standing crops but also stored ones and in the tropics it is reckoned that one third of the total production is lost during food storage. As with fungicides , the first insecticides used in the nineteenth century were inorganic e.g.

Paris Green and other compounds of arsenic . Nicotine has also been used since 1690.

[ 9 ] There are now two main groups of synthetic insecticides: 1.

Organochlorines include DDT , Aldrin , Dieldrin and BHC. They are cheap to produce, potent and persistent. DDT was used on a massive scale from the 1930s, with a peak of 72,000 tonnes used 1970. Then usage fell as the harmful environmental effects were realized. It was found worldwide in fish and birds and was even discovered in the snow in the Antarctic . It is only slightly soluble in water but is very soluble in the bloodstream. It affects the nervous and endocrine systems and causes the eggshells of birds to lack calcium causing them to be  easily breakable. It is thought to be responsible for the decline of the numbers of birds of prey like ospreys and peregrine falcons in the 1950s – they are now recovering.

[ 10 ] As well as increased concentration via the food chain, it is known to enter via permeable membranes, so fish get it through their gills. As it has low water solubility, it tends to stay at the water surface, so organisms that live there are most affected. DDT found in fish that formed part of the human food chain caused concern, but the levels found in the liver, kidney and brain tissues was less than 1 ppm and in fat was 10 ppm, which was below the level likely to cause harm. However, DDT was banned in the UK and the United States to stop the further buildup of it in the food chain. U.S. manufacturers continued to sell DDT to developing countries, who could not afford the expensive replacement chemicals and who did not have such stringent regulations governing the use of pesticides.

[ 11 ] 2.

Organophosphates , e.g.

parathion , methyl parathion and about 40 other insecticides are available nationally. Parathion is highly toxic, methyl-parathion is less so and Malathion is generally considered safe as it has low toxicity and is rapidly broken down in the mammalian liver. This group works by preventing normal nerve transmission as cholinesterase is prevented from breaking down the transmitter substance acetylcholine, resulting in uncontrolled muscle movements.

[ 12 ] Agents of war [ edit ] The disposal of munitions, and a lack of care in manufacture of munitions caused by the urgency of production, can contaminate soil for extended periods. There is little published evidence on this type of contamination largely because of restrictions placed by governments of many countries on the publication of material related to war effort. However, mustard gas stored during World War II has contaminated some sites for up to 50 years [ 13 ] and the testing of Anthrax as a potential biological weapon contaminated the whole island of Gruinard .

[ 14 ] Human health [ edit ] Exposure pathways [ edit ] Contaminated or polluted soil directly affects human health through direct contact with soil or via inhalation of soil contaminants that have vaporized; potentially greater threats are posed by the infiltration of soil contamination into groundwater aquifers used for human consumption, sometimes in areas apparently far removed from any apparent source of above-ground contamination. Toxic metals can also make their way up the food chain through plants that reside in soils containing high concentrations of heavy metals.

[ 15 ] This tends to result in the development of pollution-related diseases .

Most exposure is accidental, and exposure can happen through: [ 16 ] Ingesting dust or soil directly Ingesting food or vegetables grown in contaminated soil or with foods in contact with contaminants Skin contact with dust or soil Vapors from the soil Inhaling clouds of dust while working in soils or windy environments However, some studies estimate that 90% of exposure is through eating contaminated food.

[ 16 ] Consequences [ edit ] Health consequences from exposure to soil contamination vary greatly depending on pollutant type, the pathway of attack, and the vulnerability of the exposed population. Researchers suggest that pesticides and heavy metals in soil may harm cardiovascular health, including inflammation and change in the body's internal clock.

[ 17 ] Chronic exposure to chromium , lead , and other metals, petroleum, solvents, and many pesticide and herbicide formulations can be carcinogenic, can cause congenital disorders , or can cause other chronic health conditions.  Industrial or human-made concentrations of naturally occurring substances, such as nitrate and ammonia associated with livestock manure from agricultural operations, have also been identified as health hazards in soil and groundwater.

[ citation needed ] Chronic exposure to benzene at sufficient concentrations is known to be associated with a higher incidence of leukemia. Mercury and cyclodienes are known to induce higher incidences of kidney damage and some irreversible diseases. PCBs and cyclodienes are linked to liver toxicity.

Organophosphates and carbonates can cause a chain of responses leading to neuromuscular blockage . Many chlorinated solvents induce liver changes, kidney changes, and depression of the central nervous system. There is an entire spectrum of further health effects such as headache, nausea, fatigue, eye irritation and skin rash for the above cited and other chemicals. At sufficient dosages a large number of soil contaminants can cause death by exposure via direct contact, inhalation or ingestion of contaminants in groundwater contaminated through soil.

[ citation needed ] The Scottish Government has commissioned the Institute of Occupational Medicine to undertake a review of methods to assess risk to human health from contaminated land. The overall aim of the project is to work up guidance that should be useful to Scottish Local Authorities in assessing whether sites represent a significant possibility of significant harm (SPOSH) to human health. It is envisaged that the output of the project will be a short document providing high level guidance on health risk assessment with reference to existing published guidance and methodologies that have been identified as being particularly relevant and helpful. The project will examine how policy guidelines have been developed for determining the acceptability of risks to human health and propose an approach for assessing what constitutes unacceptable risk in line with the criteria for SPOSH as defined in the legislation and the Scottish Statutory Guidance.

[ citation needed ] Ecosystem effects [ edit ] This area is contaminated with stagnant water and refuse, making the environment unhygienic.

Not unexpectedly, soil contaminants can have significant deleterious consequences for ecosystems.

[ 18 ] There are radical soil chemistry changes which can arise from the presence of many hazardous chemicals even at low concentration of the contaminant species. These changes can manifest in the alteration of metabolism of endemic microorganisms and arthropods resident in a given soil environment. The result can be virtual eradication of some of the primary food chain, which in turn could have major consequences for predator or consumer species. Even if the chemical effect on lower life forms is small, the lower pyramid levels of the food chain may ingest alien chemicals, which normally become more concentrated for each consuming rung of the food chain. Many of these effects are now well known, such as the concentration of persistent DDT materials for avian consumers, leading to weakening of egg shells, increased chick mortality and potential extinction of species.

[ 19 ] Effects occur to agricultural lands which have certain types of soil contamination.  Contaminants typically alter plant metabolism, often causing a reduction in crop yields.  This has a secondary effect upon soil conservation , since the languishing crops cannot shield the Earth's soil from erosion . Some of these chemical contaminants have long half-lives and in other cases derivative chemicals are formed from decay of primary soil contaminants.

[ 20 ] Potential effects of contaminants to soil functions [ edit ] Heavy metals and other soil contaminants can adversely affect the activity, species composition and abundance of soil microorganisms, thereby threatening soil functions such as biochemical cycling of carbon and nitrogen.

[ 21 ] However, soil contaminants can also become less bioavailable by time, and microorganisms and ecosystems can adapt to altered conditions. Soil properties such as pH, organic matter content and texture are very important and modify mobility, bioavailability and toxicity of pollutants in contaminated soils.

[ 22 ] The same amount of contaminant can be toxic in one soil but totally harmless in another soil. This stresses the need for soil-specific risks assessment and measures.

Cleanup options [ edit ] Cleanup or environmental remediation is analyzed by environmental scientists who utilize field measurement of soil chemicals and also apply computer models ( GIS in Environmental Contamination ) for analyzing transport [ 23 ] and fate of soil chemicals. Various technologies have been developed for remediation of oil-contaminated soil and sediments [ 24 ] There are several principal strategies for remediation: Excavate soil and take it to a disposal site away from ready pathways for human or sensitive ecosystem contact.  This technique also applies to dredging of bay muds containing toxins.

Aeration of soils at the contaminated site (with attendant risk of creating air pollution ) Thermal remediation by introduction of heat to raise subsurface temperatures sufficiently high to volatilize chemical contaminants out of the soil for vapor extraction. Technologies include ISTD, electrical resistance heating (ERH) , and ET-DSP.

Bioremediation , involving microbial digestion of certain organic chemicals. Techniques used in bioremediation include landfarming , biostimulation and bioaugmentating soil biota with commercially available microflora.

Extraction of groundwater or soil vapor with an active electromechanical system, with subsequent stripping of the contaminants from the extract.

Containment of the soil contaminants  (such as by capping or paving over in place).

Phytoremediation , or using plants (such as willow) to extract heavy metals.

Mycoremediation , or using fungus to metabolize contaminants and accumulate heavy metals.

Remediation of oil contaminated sediments with self-collapsing air microbubbles .

[ 25 ] Surfactant leaching Interfacial solar evaporation to extract heavy metal ions from moist soil [ 26 ] By country [ edit ] Various national standards for concentrations of particular contaminants include the United States EPA Region 9 Preliminary Remediation Goals (U.S. PRGs), the U.S. EPA Region 3 Risk Based Concentrations (U.S. EPA RBCs) and National Environment Protection Council of Australia Guideline on Investigation Levels in Soil and Groundwater.

People's Republic of China [ edit ] The immense and sustained growth of the People's Republic of China since the 1970s has exacted a price from the land in increased soil pollution. The Ministry of Ecology and Environment believes it to be a threat to the environment, to food safety and to sustainable agriculture. According to a scientific sampling, 150 million mu (100,000 square kilometres) of China's cultivated land have been polluted, with contaminated water being used to irrigate a further 32.5 million mu (21,670 square kilometres) and another 2 million mu (1,300 square kilometres) covered or destroyed by solid waste. In total, the area accounts for one-tenth of China's cultivatable land, and is mostly in economically developed areas. An estimated 12 million tonnes of grain are contaminated by heavy metals every year, causing direct losses of 20 billion yuan ($2.57 billion USD ).

[ 27 ] Recent survey shows that 19% of the agricultural soils are contaminated which contains heavy metals and metalloids. And the rate of these heavy metals in the soil has been increased dramatically.

[ 28 ] European Union [ edit ] According to the received data from Member states, in the European Union the number of estimated potential contaminated sites is more than 2.5 million [ 29 ] and the identified contaminated sites around 342 thousand. Municipal and industrial wastes contribute most to soil contamination (38%), followed by the industrial/commercial sector (34%). Mineral oil and heavy metals are the main contaminants contributing around 60% to soil contamination. In terms of budget, the management of contaminated sites is estimated to cost around 6 billion Euros (€) annually.

[ 29 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Generic guidance commonly used in the United Kingdom are the Soil Guideline Values published by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) and the Environment Agency . These are screening values that demonstrate the minimal acceptable level of a substance. Above this there can be no assurances in terms of significant risk of harm to human health. These have been derived using the Contaminated Land Exposure Assessment Model (CLEA UK). Certain input parameters such as Health Criteria Values, age and land use are fed into CLEA UK to obtain a probabilistic output.

[ 30 ] Guidance by the Inter Departmental Committee for the Redevelopment of Contaminated Land (ICRCL) [ 31 ] has been formally withdrawn by DEFRA , for use as a prescriptive document to determine the potential need for remediation or further assessment.

The CLEA model published by DEFRA and the Environment Agency (EA) in March 2002 sets a framework for the appropriate assessment of risks to human health from contaminated land, as required by Part IIA of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 . As part of this framework, generic Soil Guideline Values (SGVs) have currently been derived for ten contaminants to be used as "intervention values".

[ 32 ] These values should not be considered as remedial targets but values above which further detailed assessment should be considered; see Dutch standards .

Three sets of CLEA SGVs have been produced for three different land uses, namely residential (with and without plant uptake) allotments commercial/industrial It is intended that the SGVs replace the former ICRCL values. The CLEA SGVs relate to assessing chronic (long term) risks to human health and do not apply to the protection of ground workers during construction, or other potential receptors such as groundwater, buildings, plants or other ecosystems.  The CLEA SGVs are not directly applicable to a site completely covered in hardstanding, as there is no direct exposure route to contaminated soils.

[ 33 ] To date, the first ten of fifty-five contaminant SGVs have been published, for the following: arsenic, cadmium , chromium, lead, inorganic mercury, nickel, selenium ethyl benzene, phenol and toluene.  Draft SGVs for benzene, naphthalene and xylene have been produced but their publication is on hold.  Toxicological data (Tox) has been published for each of these contaminants as well as for benzo[a]pyrene, benzene, dioxins, furans and dioxin-like PCBs, naphthalene, vinyl chloride, 1,1,2,2 tetrachloroethane and 1,1,1,2 tetrachloroethane, 1,1,1 trichloroethane, tetrachloroethene, carbon tetrachloride, 1,2-dichloroethane, trichloroethene and xylene.  The SGVs for ethyl benzene, phenol and toluene are dependent on the soil organic matter (SOM) content (which can be calculated from the total organic carbon (TOC) content).  As an initial screen the SGVs for 1% SOM are considered to be appropriate.

[ 34 ] Canada [ edit ] As of February 2021, there are a total of 2,500 plus contaminated sites in Canada .

[ 35 ] One infamous contaminated sited is located near a nickel-copper smelting site in Sudbury, Ontario .  A study investigating the heavy metal pollution in the vicinity of the smelter reveals that elevated levels of nickel and copper were found in the soil; values going as high as 5,104ppm Ni , and 2,892 ppm Cu within a 1.1 km range of the smelter location. Other metals were also found in the soil; such metals include iron, cobalt, and silver. Furthermore, upon examining the different vegetation surrounding the smelter it was evident that they too had been affected; the results show that the plants contained nickel, copper and aluminium as a result of soil contamination.

[ 36 ] Further information: Pollution in Canada § Soil pollution India [ edit ] In March 2009, the issue of uranium poisoning in Punjab attracted press coverage. It was alleged to be caused by fly ash ponds of thermal power stations, which reportedly lead to severe birth defects in children in the Faridkot and Bhatinda districts of Punjab . The news reports claimed the uranium levels were more than 60 times the maximum safe limit.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] In 2012, the Government of India confirmed [ 39 ] that the ground water in Malwa belt of Punjab has uranium metal that is 50% above the trace limits set by the United Nations' World Health Organization (WHO). Scientific studies, based on over 1000 samples from various sampling points, could not trace the source to fly ash and any sources from thermal power plants or industry as originally alleged. The study also revealed that the uranium concentration in ground water of Malwa district is not 60 times the WHO limits, but only 50% above the WHO limit in 3 locations. This highest concentration found in samples was less than those found naturally in ground waters currently used for human purposes elsewhere, such as Finland .

[ 40 ] Research is underway to identify natural or other sources for the uranium.

See also [ edit ] Bioremediation Bioswale Constructed wetland Contamination control Dutch pollutant standards Ecological sanitation Environmental policy in China#Soil pollution GIS in environmental contamination Groundwater pollution Groundwater remediation Habitat destruction Index of waste management articles Land degradation Landfill List of solid waste treatment technologies List of waste management companies Litter Nanoremediation Pesticide drift Plasticulture Plastic-eating organisms Remediation of contaminated sites with cement Triangle of death (Italy) Water pollution References [ edit ] ^ Anweting, I. B.; Ebong, G. A.; Okon, I. E.; Udofia, I. M.; Oladunni, N. (2024-05-24).

"Evaluating the Concentration of Pb, Hg, Co, V, As, Fe, Cu, Cd, Cr, Mn, Ni, and Zn and their Potential Sources in Soil from Two Abattoirs in Itu and Ikot Ekpene Local Government Areas of Akwa Ibom State, Nigeria" .

Journal of Applied Sciences and Environmental Management .

28 (5): 1335– 1343.

doi : 10.4314/jasem.v28i5.2 .

ISSN 2659-1499 .

^ Risk Assessment Guidance for Superfund, Human Health Evaluation Manual , Office of Emergency and Remedial Response, U.S.

Environmental Protection Agency , Washington D.C. 20450 [ date missing ] [ page needed ] ^ George, Rebecca; Joy, Varsha; S, Aiswarya; Jacob, Priya A.

"Treatment Methods for Contaminated Soils – Translating Science into Practice" (PDF) .

International Journal of Education and Applied Research . Retrieved February 19, 2016 .

^ Snyder, Caroline (October 2005). "The Dirty Work of Promoting 'Recycling' of America's Sewage Sludge".

International Journal of Occupational and Environmental Health .

11 (4): 415– 427.

doi : 10.1179/oeh.2005.11.4.415 .

PMID 16350476 .

^ Olawoyin, Richard; Oyewole, Samuel A.; Grayson, Robert L. (2012). "Potential risk effect from elevated levels of soil heavy metals on human health in the Niger delta".

Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety .

85 : 120– 130.

Bibcode : 2012EcoES..85..120O .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2012.08.004 .

PMID 22921257 .

^ MedlinePlus Encyclopedia : Pesticides ^ Jacobs, Dorian.

"Pesticides" (PDF) . American College of Medical Toxicology.

^ MedlinePlus Encyclopedia : Paraquat poisoning ^ Tomizawa, Motohiro; Casida, John E. (22 September 2005). "NEONICOTINOID INSECTICIDE TOXICOLOGY: Mechanisms of Selective Action".

Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology .

45 (1): 247– 268.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.pharmtox.45.120403.095930 .

PMID 15822177 .

^ "DDT and Birds" .

web.stanford.edu . Retrieved 2022-04-04 .

^ US EPA, OCSPP (2014-01-07).

"DDT - A Brief History and Status" .

www.epa.gov . Retrieved 2022-06-17 .

^ Saini, Parveen (January 2022).

"Impacts of Soil Pollution on Human Health and Ecosystem Sustainability" (PDF) .

International Journal of Advanced Research in Arts, Science, Engineering & Management .

9 (1).

^ Bellamy, Christopher (3 June 1996).

"Sixty secret mustard gas sites uncovered" .

The Independent .

^ "Britain's 'Anthrax Island' " .

BBC News . 25 July 2001.

^ Hapke, H.-J. (1996). "Heavy metal transfer in the food chain to humans".

Fertilizers and Environment . pp.

431– 436.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-009-1586-2_73 .

ISBN 978-94-010-7210-6 .

^ a b Rodríguez Eugenio, Natalia (2021).

"Environmental, health and socio-economic impacts of soil pollution" .

Global assessment of soil pollution: Report .

doi : 10.4060/cb4894en .

ISBN 978-92-5-134469-9 .

^ "Scientists warn of links between soil pollution and heart disease" .

ScienceDaily (Press release). European Society of Cardiology. 1 July 2022.

^ Michael Hogan, Leda Patmore, Gary Latshaw and Harry Seidman Computer modelng of pesticide transport in soil for five instrumented watersheds , prepared for the U.S.

Environmental Protection Agency Southeast Water laboratory, Athens, Ga. by ESL Inc., Sunnyvale, California (1973) ^ Jayaraj, Ravindran; Megha, Pankajshan; Sreedev, Puthur (December 2016).

"Organochlorine pesticides, their toxic effects on living organisms and their fate in the environment" .

Interdisciplinary Toxicology .

9 ( 3– 4): 90– 100.

doi : 10.1515/intox-2016-0012 .

PMC 5464684 .

PMID 28652852 .

^ Bussian, Bernd M.; Rodríguez Eugenio, Natalia; Wilson, Susan C. (2021).

"The chemical nature and properties of soil contaminants" .

Global assessment of soil pollution: Report .

doi : 10.4060/cb4894en .

ISBN 978-92-5-134469-9 .

^ Rijk, Ingrid J. C.; Ekblad, Alf (April 2020).

"Carbon and nitrogen cycling in a lead polluted grassland evaluated using stable isotopes (δ13C and δ15N) and microbial, plant and soil parameters" .

Plant and Soil .

449 ( 1– 2): 249– 266.

Bibcode : 2020PlSoi.449..249R .

doi : 10.1007/s11104-020-04467-7 .

S2CID 212689936 .

^ Alloway, Brian J., ed. (2013).

Heavy Metals in Soils . Environmental Pollution. Vol. 22.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-007-4470-7 .

ISBN 978-94-007-4469-1 .

[ page needed ] ^ S.K. Gupta, C.T. Kincaid, P.R. Mayer, C.A. Newbill and C.R. Cole, "A multidimensional finite element code for the analysis of coupled fluid, energy and solute transport", Battelle Pacific Northwest Laboratory PNL-2939, EPA contract 68-03-3116 (1982) ^ Agarwal, A.; Liu, Y. (2015). "Remediation technologies for oil-contaminated sediments".

Marine Pollution Bulletin .

101 (2): 483– 490.

Bibcode : 2015MarPB.101..483A .

doi : 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2015.09.010 .

PMID 26414316 .

^ Agarwal, Ashutosh; Zhou, Yufeng; Liu, Yu (December 2016). "Remediation of oil-contaminated sand with self-collapsing air microbubbles".

Environmental Science and Pollution Research .

23 (23): 23876– 23883.

Bibcode : 2016ESPR...2323876A .

doi : 10.1007/s11356-016-7601-5 .

PMID 27628704 .

^ Wu, Pan; Wu, Xuan; Xu, Haolan; Owens, Gary (2021-09-05).

"Interfacial solar evaporation driven lead removal from a contaminated soil" .

EcoMat .

3 (5).

doi : 10.1002/eom2.12140 .

S2CID 239680091 .

^ Xu, Qi (29 January 2007).

"Facing up to 'invisible pollution' " .

Dialogue Earth .

^ Zhao, Fang-Jie; Ma, Yibing; Zhu, Yong-Guan; Tang, Zhong; McGrath, Steve P. (20 January 2015). "Soil Contamination in China: Current Status and Mitigation Strategies".

Environmental Science & Technology .

49 (2): 750– 759.

Bibcode : 2015EnST...49..750Z .

doi : 10.1021/es5047099 .

PMID 25514502 .

^ a b Panagos, Panos; Liedekerke, Marc Van; Yigini, Yusuf; Montanarella, Luca (2013).

"Contaminated Sites in Europe: Review of the Current Situation Based on Data Collected through a European Network" .

Journal of Environmental and Public Health .

2013 : 158764.

doi : 10.1155/2013/158764 .

PMC 3697397 .

PMID 23843802 .

^ Jannik, T.; Stagich, B. (25 May 2017). Land and Water Use Characteristics and Human Health Input Parameters for use in Environmental Dosimetry and Risk Assessments at the Savannah River Site 2017 Update (Report).

doi : 10.2172/1365658 .

^ "www.ContaminatedLAND.co.uk - ICRCL 59/83 Trigger Concentrations" . Archived from the original on 2016-10-09 . Retrieved 2016-05-04 .

^ "What are "Soil Guideline Values" and which should I use?" .

Manaaki Whenua . 10 August 2019 . Retrieved 2022-07-10 .

^ "LCRM: Stage 1 risk assessment" .

GOV.UK . Retrieved 2022-07-10 .

^ Sun, Yiming; Wang, Jicai; Guo, Guanlin; Li, Hong; Jones, Kevin (January 2020). "A comprehensive comparison and analysis of soil screening values derived and used in China and the UK".

Environmental Pollution .

256 : 113404.

Bibcode : 2020EPoll.25613404S .

doi : 10.1016/j.envpol.2019.113404 .

PMID 31735398 .

^ "Federal Contaminated Sites Inventory: Find Sites by Province or Territory" .

Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat . January 1994.

^ Hutchinson, T. C.; Whitby, L. M. (1974). "Heavy-metal Pollution in the Sudbury Mining and Smelting Region of Canada, I. Soil and Vegetation Contamination by Nickel, Copper, and Other Metals".

Environmental Conservation .

1 (2): 123– 132.

Bibcode : 1974EnvCo...1..123H .

doi : 10.1017/S0376892900004240 .

S2CID 86686979 .

^ Yadav, Priya (2 April 2009).

"Uranium deforms kids in Faridkot" .

The Times of India .

^ Jolly, Asit (2 April 2009).

"Punjab disability 'uranium link' " . BBC News.

^ Uranium in Ground Water Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Government of India (2012) ^ Atomic Energy Report – Malwa Punjab Uranium Q&A Archived 2014-02-28 at the Wayback Machine Lok Sabha, Government of India (2012) Further reading [ edit ] Panagos, Panos; Van Liedekerke, Marc; Yigini, Yusuf; Montanarella, Luca (2013).

"Contaminated Sites in Europe: Review of the Current Situation Based on Data Collected through a European Network" .

Journal of Environmental and Public Health .

2013 : 1– 11.

doi : 10.1155/2013/158764 .

PMC 3697397 .

PMID 23843802 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Soil pollution .

Portal for soil and water management in Europe Independent information gateway originally funded by the European Commission for topics related to soil and water, including contaminated land, soil and water management.

European Soil Portal: Soil Contamination At EU-level, the issue of contaminated sites (local contamination) and contaminated land (diffuse contamination) has been considered by:  European Soil Data Centre (ESDAC).

Article on soil contamination in China Arsenic in groundwater Book on arsenic in groundwater by IAH's Netherlands Chapter and the Netherlands Hydrological Society v t e Soil science History Index Main fields Pedology Edaphology Soil biology Soil microbiology Soil zoology Soil ecology Soil physics Soil mechanics Soil chemistry Environmental soil science Agricultural soil science Soil topics Soil Pedosphere Soil morphology Pedodiversity Soil formation Soil erosion Soil contamination Soil retrogression and degradation Soil compaction Soil compaction (agriculture) Soil sealing Soil salinity Alkali soil Soil pH Soil acidification Soil health Soil life Soil biodiversity Soil quality Soil value Soil fertility Soil resilience Soil color Soil texture Soil structure Pore space in soil Pore water pressure Soil crust Soil horizon Soil biomantle Soil carbon Soil gas Soil respiration Soil organic matter Soil moisture Soil water (retention) Soil type v t e Soil classification World Reference Base for Soil Resources (1998–) Acrisols Alisols Andosols Anthrosols Arenosols Calcisols Cambisols Chernozem Cryosols Durisols Ferralsols Fluvisols Gleysols Gypsisols Histosol Kastanozems Leptosols Lixisols Luvisols Nitisols Phaeozems Planosols Plinthosols Podzols Regosols Retisols Solonchaks Solonetz Stagnosol Technosols Umbrisols Vertisols USDA soil taxonomy Alfisols Andisols Aridisols Entisols Gelisols Histosols Inceptisols Mollisols Oxisols Spodosols Ultisols Vertisols Other systems FAO soil classification (1974–1998) Unified Soil Classification System AASHTO Soil Classification System Référentiel pédologique (French classification system) Canadian system of soil classification Australian Soil Classification Polish Soil Classification 1938 USDA soil taxonomy List of U.S. state soils List of vineyard soil types PG-3 (Spanish classification system) Non-systematic soil types Sand Silt Clay Loam Topsoil Subsoil Soil crust Claypan Hardpan Gypcrust Caliche Parent material Pedosphere Laimosphere Rhizosphere Bulk soil Alkali soil Bay mud Blue goo Brickearth Brown earth Calcareous grassland Dark earth Dry quicksand Duplex soil Eluvium Expansive clay Fill dirt Fuller's earth Hydrophobic soil Loess Lunar soil Martian soil Mud Muskeg Paleosol Peat Prime farmland Quicksand Serpentine soil Spodic soil Stagnogley Subaqueous soil Takir Terra preta Terra rossa Tropical peat Yedoma Types of soil Applications Soil conservation Soil management Soil guideline value Soil survey Soil test Soil governance Soil value Soil salinity control Erosion control Agroecology Liming (soil) Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Geomorphology Geotechnical engineering Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Societies, Initiatives Australian Society of Soil Science Incorporated Canadian Society of Soil Science Central Soil Salinity Research Institute (India) German Soil Science Society Indian Institute of Soil Science International Union of Soil Sciences International Year of Soil National Society of Consulting Soil Scientists (US) OPAL Soil Centre (UK) Soil Science Society of Poland Soil and Water Conservation Society (US) Soil Science Society of America World Congress of Soil Science Scientific journals Acta Agriculturae Scandinavica B Journal of Soil and Water Conservation Plant and Soil Pochvovedenie Soil Research Soil Science Society of America Journal See also Land use Land conversion Land management Vegetation Infiltration (hydrology) Groundwater Crust (geology) Impervious surface / Surface runoff Petrichor Wikipedia:WikiProject Soil Category soil Category soil science List of soil scientists v t e Pollution History Air Acid rain Air quality index Air pollution measurement Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Biofuel Biomass Coal Joss paper Open burning of waste Construction Renovation Demolition Exhaust gas Diesel exhaust Haze Smoke Indoor air quality Internal combustion engine Global dimming Global distillation Mining Ozone depletion Particulates Asbestos Oil refining Polluting cooking fuels Persistent organic pollutant Smelting Smog Soot Black carbon Volatile organic compound Waste Biological Biological hazard Genetic pollution Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information pollution Electromagnetic Light Ecological light pollution Overillumination Radio spectrum pollution Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Land Water Air Rail Sustainable transport Urban Sonar Marine mammals and sonar Industrial Military Abstract Noise control Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Electromagnetic radiation and health Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural pollution Herbicides Manure waste Pesticides Land degradation Bioremediation Open defecation Electrical resistance heating Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Battery recycling Foam food container Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Biomedical waste Chemical waste Construction waste Lead poisoning Mercury poisoning Toxic waste Industrial waste Lead smelting Litter Mining Coal mining Gold mining Surface mining Deep sea mining Mining waste Uranium mining Municipal solid waste Garbage Nanomaterials Plastic pollution Microplastics Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Landfill Thermal treatment Space Satellite Visual Air travel Clutter (advertising) Traffic signs Overhead power lines Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare ( Agent Orange ) Nuclear holocaust ( Nuclear fallout - nuclear famine - nuclear winter ) Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biological pollution Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine debris Monitoring Nonpoint source pollution Nutrient pollution Ocean acidification Oil exploitation Oil exploration Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Sewage Septic tanks Pit latrine Shipping Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Thermal Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Topics Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Brain health and pollution Misc Area source Debris Dust Garbology Legacy pollution Midden Point source Waste Responses Cleaner production Industrial ecology Pollution haven hypothesis Pollutant release and transfer register Polluter pays principle Pollution control Waste minimisation Zero waste Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM 2.5 Most polluted countries Most polluted rivers Treaties Categories ( by country ) Commons WikiProject Environment WikiProject Ecology Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Environmental science Main fields Atmospheric science Biogeochemistry Ecology Environmental chemistry Geosciences Hydrology Limnology Oceanography Soil science Related fields Biology Chemistry green Ecological economics Environmental design Environmental economics Environmental engineering Environmental health epidemiology Environmental studies Environmental humanities Environmental statistics Environmental toxicology Geodesy Physics Radioecology Sustainability science Systems ecology Urban ecology Applications Energy conservation Environmental technology Natural resource management Pollution control Public transport encouragement Recycling Remediation Renewable energy Road ecology Sewage treatment Urban metabolism Water purification Waste management Lists Degrees Journals Research institutes Glossary Environment by year See also Human impact on the environment Sustainability Technogaianism Category scientists Commons Environment portal WikiProject v t e Public health General Auxology Biological hazard Chief medical officer Cultural competence Deviance Environmental health Eugenics History of Liberal Euthenics Genomics Globalization and disease Harm reduction Health economics Health literacy Health policy Health system Health care reform Housing First Human right to water and sanitation Management of depression Public health law National public health institute Health politics Labor rights Maternal health Medical anthropology Medical sociology Mental health ( Ministers ) Occupational safety and health Pharmaceutical policy Pollution Air Water Soil Radiation Light Prisoners' rights Public health intervention Public health laboratory Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to rest and leisure Right to sit Security of person Sexual and reproductive health Social psychology Sociology of health and illness Unisex changing rooms Unisex public toilets Workers' right to access the toilet Preventive healthcare Behavior change Theories Drug checking Family planning Harm reduction Health promotion Human nutrition Healthy diet Preventive nutrition Hygiene Food safety Hand washing Infection control Oral hygiene Needle and syringe programmes Occupational safety and health Human factors and ergonomics Hygiene Controlled Drugs Injury prevention Medicine Nursing Patient safety Organization Pharmacovigilance Reagent testing Safe sex Sanitation Emergency Fecal–oral transmission Open defecation Sanitary sewer Waterborne diseases Worker School hygiene Smoking cessation Supervised injection site Vaccination Vector control Population health Biostatistics Child mortality Community health Epidemiology Global health Health impact assessment Health system Infant mortality Open-source healthcare software Multimorbidity Public health informatics Social determinants of health Commercial determinants of health Health equity Race and health Social medicine Biological and epidemiological statistics Case–control study Randomized controlled trial Relative risk Statistical hypothesis testing Analysis of variance (ANOVA) Regression analysis ROC curve Student's t -test Z -test Statistical software Infectious and epidemic disease prevention Asymptomatic carrier Epidemics List Notifiable diseases List Public health surveillance Disease surveillance Quarantine Sexually transmitted infection Social distancing Tropical disease Vaccine trial WASH Food hygiene and safety management Food Additive Chemistry Engineering Microbiology Processing Safety Safety scandals Good agricultural practice Good manufacturing practice HACCP ISO 22000 Health behavioral sciences Diffusion of innovations Health belief model Health communication Health psychology Positive deviance PRECEDE–PROCEED model Social cognitive theory Social norms approach Theory of planned behavior Transtheoretical model Organizations, education and history Organizations Caribbean Caribbean Public Health Agency China Center for Disease Control and Prevention Europe Centre for Disease Prevention and Control Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Russia Rospotrebnadzor India Ministry of Health and Family Welfare Canada Health Canada Public Health Agency U.S.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Health departments in the United States Council on Education for Public Health Public Health Service World Health Organization World Toilet Organization ( Full list ) Education Health education Higher education Bachelor of Science in Public Health Doctor of Public Health Professional degrees of public health Schools of public health History History of public health in the United Kingdom History of public health in the United States History of public health in Australia Sara Josephine Baker Samuel Jay Crumbine Carl Rogers Darnall Joseph Lister Margaret Sanger John Snow Typhoid Mary Radium Girls Germ theory of disease Social hygiene movement Category Commons WikiProject v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Soil_contamination&oldid=1284731820 " Categories : Soil contamination Environmental chemistry Environmental issues with soil Pollution Soil chemistry Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from June 2024 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Wikipedia articles in need of updating from September 2012 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2012 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Pages using div col with small parameter Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 April 2025, at 11:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Soil contamination 63 languages Add topic

