Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Structure 3 Classifications Toggle Classifications subsection 3.1 Thermoplastics and thermosetting polymers 3.2 Commodity, engineering, and high-performance plastics 3.2.1 Commodity plastics 3.2.2 Engineering plastics 3.2.3 High-performance plastics 3.3 Amorphous and crystalline plastics 3.4 Conductive polymers 3.5 Biodegradable plastics and bioplastics 3.5.1 Biodegradable plastics 3.5.2 Bioplastics 4 Plastic industry Toggle Plastic industry subsection 4.1 Production 4.2 Compounding 4.3 Converting 5 Gallery 6 Applications 7 Additives Toggle Additives subsection 7.1 Leaching 7.2 Recycling 7.3 Health effects 7.3.1 Poor countries 7.3.2 Animals 7.4 Types of additive 8 Health effects Toggle Health effects subsection 8.1 Bisphenol A (BPA) 9 Environmental effects Toggle Environmental effects subsection 9.1 Microplastics 9.2 Decomposition of plastics 9.3 Recycling 9.3.1 Pyrolysis 9.4 Greenhouse gas emissions 9.5 Production of plastics 9.6 Incineration of plastics 9.7 Facilitation of natural degradation 10 History 11 Policy 12 See also 13 References 14 Sources 15 Further reading 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Plastic 142 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ کٲشُر Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Коми Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lombard Magyar Madhurâ Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Walon West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Material of a wide range of synthetic or semi-synthetic organic solids For other uses, see Plastic (disambiguation) .

Household items made of various types of plastics Plastics are a wide range of synthetic or semisynthetic materials composed primarily of polymers . Their defining characteristic, plasticity , allows them to be molded , extruded , or pressed into a diverse range of solid forms. This adaptability, combined with a wide range of other properties such as low weight, durability, flexibility, chemical resistance, low toxicity, and low-cost production, has led to their widespread use around the world.

[ 1 ] While most plastics are produced from natural gas and petroleum , a growing minority are produced from renewable resources like polylactic acid .

[ 2 ] Between 1950 and 2017, 9.2 billion metric tons of plastic are estimated to have been made, with more than half of this amount being produced since 2004. In 2023 alone, preliminary figures indicate that over 400 million metric tons of plastic were produced worldwide.

[ 3 ] If global trends in plastic demand continue, it is projected that annual global plastic production will exceed 1.3 billion tons by 2060.

[ 3 ] The primary uses for plastic include packaging, which makes up about 40% of its usage, and building and construction, which makes up about 20% of its usage.

[ 1 ] The success and dominance of plastics since the early 20th century has had major benefits for mankind, ranging from medical devices to light-weight construction materials. The sewage systems in many countries relies on the resiliency and adaptability of polyvinyl chloride . It is also true that plastics are the basis of widespread environmental concerns, [ 4 ] due to their slow decomposition rate in natural ecosystems. Most plastic produced has not been reused. Some is unsuitable for reuse. Much is captured in landfills or as plastic pollution . Particular concern focuses on microplastics .

Marine plastic pollution , for example, creates garbage patches . Of all the plastic discarded so far, some 14% has been incinerated and less than 10% has been recycled.

[ 5 ] In developed economies, about a third of plastic is used in packaging and roughly the same in buildings in applications such as piping , plumbing or vinyl siding .

[ 6 ] Other uses include automobiles (up to 20% plastic [ 6 ] ), furniture, and toys.

[ 6 ] In the developing world, the applications of plastic may differ; 42% of India's consumption is used in packaging.

[ 6 ] Worldwide, about 50 kg of plastic is produced annually per person, with production doubling every ten years.

The world's first fully synthetic plastic was Bakelite , invented in New York in 1907, by Leo Baekeland , [ 7 ] who coined the term "plastics".

[ 8 ] Dozens of different types of plastics are produced today, such as polyethylene , which is widely used in product packaging , and polyvinyl chloride (PVC), used in construction and pipes because of its strength and durability. Many chemists have contributed to the materials science of plastics, including Nobel laureate Hermann Staudinger , who has been called "the father of polymer chemistry ", and Herman Mark , known as "the father of polymer physics ".

[ 9 ] Etymology The word plastic derives from the Ancient Greek πλαστικός ( plastikos ), meaning "capable of being shaped or molded," which itself comes from πλαστός ( plastos ), meaning "molded" or "formed." [ 10 ] In modern usage, the word plastic most commonly refers to the solid synthetic products of petrochemical -derived manufacturing.

[ 11 ] The word plasticity , as a noun, specifically refers to the deformability of the materials used in the manufacture of plastics. Plasticity allows molding, extrusion , or compression into a variety of shapes, including films, fibers, plates, tubes, bottles, and boxes, among many others. In materials science , plasticity also has a more technical definition, describing the nonreversible change in form of solid substances when subjected to external forces. However, this definition extends beyond the scope of this article.

[ citation needed ] Structure See also: Polymer Most plastics contain organic polymers.

[ 12 ] The vast majority of these polymers are formed from chains of carbon atoms, with or without the attachment of oxygen, nitrogen or sulfur atoms. These chains comprise many repeating units formed from monomers . Each polymer chain consists of several thousand repeating units. The backbone is the part of the chain that is on the main path , linking together a large number of repeat units. To customize the properties of a plastic, different molecular groups called side chains hang from this backbone; they are usually attached to the monomers before the monomers themselves are linked together to form the polymer chain. The structure of these side chains influences the properties of the polymer.

[ citation needed ] Classifications Plastics are usually classified by the chemical structure of the polymer's backbone and side chains. Important groups classified in this way include the acrylics , polyesters , silicones , polyurethanes , and halogenated plastics . Plastics can be classified by the chemical process used in their synthesis, such as condensation , polyaddition , and cross-linking .

[ 13 ] They can also be classified by their physical properties, including hardness , density , tensile strength , thermal resistance , and glass transition temperature . Plastics can additionally be classified by their resistance and reactions to various substances and processes, such as exposure to organic solvents, oxidation , and ionizing radiation .

[ 14 ] Other classifications of plastics are based on qualities relevant to manufacturing or product design for a particular purpose. Examples include thermoplastics , thermosets , conductive polymers , biodegradable plastics , engineering plastics and elastomers .

Thermoplastics and thermosetting polymers A plastic handle from a kitchen utensil, deformed by heat and partially melted One important classification of plastics is the degree to which the chemical processes used to make them are reversible or not.

Thermoplastics do not undergo chemical change in their composition when heated and thus can be molded repeatedly. Examples include polyethylene (PE), polypropylene (PP), polystyrene (PS), and polyvinyl chloride (PVC).

[ 15 ] Thermosets, or thermosetting polymers, can melt and take shape only once: after they have solidified, they stay solid and retain their shape permanently.

[ 16 ] If reheated, thermosets decompose rather than melt. Examples of thermosets include epoxy resin, polyimide, and Bakelite. The vulcanization of rubber is an example of this process. Before heating in the presence of sulfur, natural rubber ( polyisoprene ) is a sticky, slightly runny material, and after vulcanization, the product is dry and rigid.

Thermosets consist of closely cross-linked polymers. Cross-links are shown as red dots in the figure.

Elastomers consist of wide-meshed cross-linked polymers. The wide mesh allows the material to stretch under tensile load.

Thermoplastics consist of non-crosslinked polymers, often with a semi-crystalline structure (shown in red). They have a glass transition temperature and are fusible.

Commodity, engineering, and high-performance plastics Commodity plastics Chemical structures and uses of some common plastics Approximately 80% of global plastic production includes commodity plastics, a type of plastics primarily chosen for their low cost and ease of manufacturing. These plastics are mass-produced and used in everyday applications such as packaging, food containers, and household products. Most commodity plastics are identifiable by their Resin Identification Codes (RICs), a standardized numbering system developed by ASTM International .

Polyethylene terephthalate (PET or PETE) High-density polyethylene (HDPE or PE-HD) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC or V) Low-density polyethylene (LDPE or PE-LD), Polypropylene (PP) Polystyrene (PS) Beyond the six most widely recognized listed above, there are more commodity plastics that are also mass-produced and commonly used, such as polyurethanes (PURs). PURs are a class of plastics also designated as commodity plastics due to their low cost, ease of manufacturing, and versatility. However, they lack RICs because they encompass many chemically diverse formulations such as foams and adhesives.

Packaging represents the largest application of commodity plastics, consuming 146 million metric tons (36% of global production) in 2015 alone. Beyond packaging, however, these plastics are critical in various other fields such as agriculture, construction, consumer goods, and healthcare.

Although many traits such as durability and resistance to biodegradability are desirable in various applications, they have led to significant environmental issues. An estimated 8 to 12 million tons of plastic enter oceans annually, primarily from mismanaged packaging waste. Commodity plastics account for the majority of this pollution, as their recycling rates remain low (e.g., only ~9% of all plastics are recycled globally). Microplastics derived from their degradation further threaten ecosystems and human health.

A huge number of plastics exist beyond the commodity plastics, with many having exceptional properties.

This graph was using the legacy Graph extension , which is no longer supported. It needs to be converted to the new Chart extension .

Global plastic production by polymer type (2015) [ 17 ] Polymer Production (Mt) Percentage of all plastics (%) Polymer type Thermal character Low-density polyethylene (LDPE) 64 15.7 Polyolefin Thermoplastic High-density polyethylene (HDPE) 52 12.8 Polyolefin Thermoplastic polypropylene (PP) 68 16.7 Polyolefin Thermoplastic Polystyrene (PS) 25 6.1 Unsaturated polyolefin Thermoplastic Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) 38 9.3 Halogenated Thermoplastic Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) 33 8.1 Condensation Thermoplastic Polyurethane (PUR) 27 6.6 Condensation Thermoset [ 18 ] PP&A Fibers [ 19 ] 59 14.5 Condensation Thermoplastic All Others 16 3.9 Various Varies Additives 25 6.1 - - Total 407 100 - - Engineering plastics Engineering plastics are more robust and are used to manufacture products such as vehicle parts, building and construction materials, and some machine parts. In some cases, they are polymer blends formed by mixing different plastics together (ABS, HIPS etc.). Engineering plastics can replace metals in vehicles, lowering their weight and improving fuel efficiency by 6–8%. Roughly 50% of the volume of modern cars is made of plastic, but this only accounts for 12–17% of the vehicle weight.

[ 20 ] Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS): electronic equipment cases (e.g., computer monitors, printers, keyboards) and drainage pipes High-impact polystyrene (HIPS): refrigerator liners, food packaging , and vending cups Polycarbonate (PC): compact discs, eyeglasses, riot shields , security windows, traffic lights, and lenses Polycarbonate + acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (PC + ABS): a blend of PC and ABS that creates a stronger plastic used in car interior and exterior parts, and in mobile phone bodies Polyethylene + acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (PE + ABS): a slippery blend of PE and ABS used in low-duty dry bearings Polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) ( acrylic ): contact lenses (of the original "hard" variety), glazing (best known in this form by its various trade names around the world; e.g.

Perspex , Plexiglas, and Oroglas), fluorescent-light diffusers, and rear light covers for vehicles. It also forms the basis of artistic and commercial acrylic paints , when suspended in water with the use of other agents.

Silicones (polysiloxanes): heat-resistant resins used mainly as sealants but also used for high-temperature cooking utensils and as a base resin for industrial paints Urea-formaldehyde (UF): one of the aminoplasts used as a multi-colorable alternative to phenolics: used as a wood adhesive (for plywood, chipboard, hardboard) and electrical switch housings High-performance plastics High-performance plastics are a category of polymers exhibiting superior properties compared to commodity and engineering plastics. These plastics can withstand high temperatures, often above 302°F (150°C), are highly resistant to chemical corrosion and degradation, have excellent mechanical and electric properties, and are lightweight and extremely versatile.

Aramids : best known for their use in the manufacture of body armor , this class of heat-resistant and strong synthetic fibers also has applications in aerospace and military and includes Kevlar , Nomex , and Twaron .

Ultra-high-molecular-weight polyethylenes (UHMWPE) Polyetheretherketone (PEEK): strong, chemical- and heat-resistant thermoplastic; its biocompatibility allows for use in medical implant applications and aerospace moldings. It is one of the most expensive commercial polymers.

Polyetherimide (PEI): a high-temperature, chemically stable polymer that does not crystallize Polyimide : a high-temperature plastic used in materials such as Kapton tape Polysulfone (PS): high-temperature melt-processable resin used in membranes, filtration media, water heater dip tubes and other high-temperature applications Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE): heat-resistant, low-friction coatings used in non-stick surfaces for frying pans, plumber's tape, and water slides Polyamide-imide (PAI): high-performance engineering plastic extensively used in high-performance gears, switches, transmissions, and other automotive components and aerospace parts [ 21 ] Polyphenylene sulfide (PPS): extreme chemical resistance, flame retardancy, and thermal stability (up to 428°F).

Polyethersulfone (PES): best known for their clarity, high-temperature resistance (up to 392°F), and biocompatibility. Commonly used in medical devices, food-grade equipment, and aerospace lighting.

Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF): a nonreactive thermoplastic fluoropolymer known for extreme chemical resistance , ultraviolet stability, and piezoelectric properties. Commonly used in semiconductor tubing, lithium-ion battery binders, and architectural coatings.

Liquid-crystal polymers (LCPs): a class of polymers combining the properties of both liquids and crystals, known for extreme dimensional stability, low thermal expansion, and high dielectric strength. Commonly used in miniature electronics, fiber-optic cables , and surgical devices.

Polyimides (PIs): a class of high-performance thermosets, able to operate up to 572°F and best known for their excellent dielectric properties and radiation resistance. Commonly used in flexible printed circuits, space suit layers, and jet engine components.

Polybenzimidazole (PBI): extremely high heat resistance (up to 752°F short-term), low outgassing, and flame resistance. Commonly used in firefighting gear , semiconductor tools, and aerospace thermal shields .

Bismaleimide (BMI): known for its high glass transition temperature (around 482°F) and low moisture absorption. Commonly used in composite aircraft matrices and military radar systems.

Cyanate esters : known for their low dielectric loss and space-grade radiation resistance. Commonly used in satellite components and radar antennas.

Amorphous and crystalline plastics Many plastics are completely amorphous , meaning they lack a highly ordered molecular structure.

[ 22 ] Crystalline plastics exhibit a pattern of more regularly spaced atoms, such as high-density polyethylene (HDPE), polybutylene terephthalate (PBT), and polyether ether ketone (PEEK). However, some plastics are partially amorphous and partially crystalline in molecular structure, giving them both a melting point and one or more glass transitions (the temperature above which the extent of localized molecular flexibility is substantially increased). These so-called semi-crystalline plastics include polyethylene, polypropylene, polyvinyl chloride, polyamides (nylons), polyesters and some polyurethanes.

Conductive polymers Main article: Conductive polymer Intrinsically conducting polymers (ICPs) are organic polymers that conduct electricity. While a conductivity of up to 80 kilosiemens per centimeter (kS/cm) in stretch-oriented polyacetylene [ 23 ] has been achieved, it does not approach that of most metals. For example, copper has a conductivity of several hundred kS/cm.

[ 24 ] Biodegradable plastics and bioplastics Biodegradable plastics Main article: Biodegradable plastic Biodegradable plastics are plastics that degrade (break down) upon exposure to biological factors, such as sunlight, ultra-violet radiation , moisture, bacteria, enzymes, or wind abrasion. Attacks by insects, such as waxworms and mealworms, can also be considered forms of biodegradation.

Aerobic degradation requires the plastic to be exposed at the surface, whereas anaerobic degradation would be effective in landfill or composting systems. Some companies produce biodegradable additives to further promote biodegradation. Although starch powder can be added as a filler to facilitate degradation of some plastics, such treatment does not lead to complete breakdown. Some researchers have genetically engineered bacteria to synthesize completely biodegradable plastics, such as polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB); however, As of 2021, [update] these were still relatively expensive.

[ 25 ] Bioplastics Main article: Bioplastic While most plastics are produced from petrochemicals, bioplastics are made substantially from renewable plant materials like cellulose and starch.

[ 26 ] Due both to the finite limits of fossil fuel reserves and to rising levels of greenhouse gases caused primarily by the burning of those fuels, the development of bioplastics is a growing field.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Global production capacity for bio-based plastics is estimated at 327,000 tonnes per year. In contrast, global production of polyethylene (PE) and polypropylene (PP), the world's leading petrochemical-derived polyolefins, was estimated at over 150 million tonnes in 2015.

[ 29 ] Plastic industry The plastic industry includes the global production, compounding , conversion and sale of plastic products. Although the Middle East and Russia produce most of the required petrochemical raw materials, the production of plastic is concentrated in the global East and West. The plastic industry comprises a huge number of companies and can be divided into several sectors: Production Between 1950 and 2017, 9.2 billion tonnes of plastic are estimated to have been made, with more than half of this having been produced since 2004. Since the birth of the plastic industry in the 1950s, global production has increased enormously, reaching 400 million tonnes a year in 2021; this is up from 381 million metric tonnes in 2015 (excluding additives).

[ 5 ] [ 17 ] From the 1950s, rapid growth occurred in the use of plastics for packaging, in building and construction, and in other sectors.

[ 5 ] If global trends on plastic demand continue, it is estimated that by 2050 annual global plastic production will exceed 1.1-billion tonnes annually.

[ 5 ] Polypropylene plants A Slovnaft facility in Bratislava , Slovakia A SOCAR Polymer polypropylene plant in Sumgayit , Azerbaijan This graph was using the legacy Graph extension , which is no longer supported. It needs to be converted to the new Chart extension .

Annual global plastic production 1950–2015.

[ 17 ] Vertical lines denote the 1973–1975 recession and the 2008 financial crisis which caused brief lowering of plastic production.

Plastics are produced in chemical plants by the polymerization of their starting materials ( monomers ); which are almost always petrochemical in nature. Such facilities are normally large and are visually similar to oil refineries , with sprawling pipework running throughout. The large size of these plants allows them to exploit economies of scale . Despite this, plastic production is not particularly monopolized, with about 100 companies accounting for 90% of global production.

[ 30 ] This includes a mixture of private and state-owned enterprises. Roughly half of all production takes place in East Asia, with China being the largest single producer. Major international producers include: Global plastic production (2020) [ 31 ] Region Global production China 31% Japan 3% Rest of Asia 17% NAFTA 19% Latin America 4% Europe 16% CIS 3% Middle East & Africa 7% Dow Chemical LyondellBasell ExxonMobil SABIC BASF Sibur Shin-Etsu Chemical Indorama Ventures Sinopec Braskem Historically, Europe and North America have dominated global plastics production. However, since 2010 Asia has emerged as a significant producer, with China accounting for 31% of total plastic resin production in 2020.

[ 31 ] Regional differences in the volume of plastics production are driven by user demand, the price of fossil fuel feedstocks, and investments made in the petrochemical industry. For example, since 2010 over US$200 billion has been invested in the United States in new plastic and chemical plants, stimulated by the low cost of raw materials. In the European Union (EU), too, heavy investments have been made in the plastics industry, which employs over 1.6-million people with a turnover of more than 360 billion euros per year. In China in 2016 there were over 15,000 plastic manufacturing companies, generating more than US$366 billion in revenue.

[ 5 ] In 2017, the global plastics market was dominated by thermoplastics – polymers that can be melted and recast. Thermoplastics include polyethylene (PE), polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polypropylene (PP), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polystyrene (PS) and synthetic fibers, which together represent 86% of all plastics.

[ 5 ] Compounding Plastic compounding scheme for a thermosoftening material Plastic is not sold as a pure unadulterated substance, but is instead mixed with various chemicals and other materials, which are collectively known as additives. These are added during the compounding stage and include substances such as stabilizers , plasticizers and dyes , which are intended to improve the lifespan, workability or appearance of the final item. In some cases, this can involve mixing different types of plastic together to form a polymer blend , such as high impact polystyrene . Large companies may do their own compounding prior to production, but some producers have it done by a third party. Companies that specialize in this work are known as Compounders.

The compounding of thermosetting plastic is relatively straightforward; as it remains liquid until it is cured into its final form. For thermosoftening materials, which are used to make the majority of products, it is necessary to melt the plastic in order to mix-in the additives. This involves heating it to anywhere between 150–320 °C (300–610 °F). Molten plastic is viscous and exhibits laminar flow , leading to poor mixing. Compounding is therefore done using extrusion equipment, which is able to supply the necessary heat and mixing to give a properly dispersed product.

The concentrations of most additives are usually quite low, however high levels can be added to create Masterbatch products. The additives in these are concentrated but still properly dispersed in the host resin. Masterbatch granules can be mixed with cheaper bulk polymer and will release their additives during processing to give a homogeneous final product. This can be cheaper than working with a fully compounded material and is particularly common for the introduction of color.

Converting Short video on injection molding (9 min 37 s) Blow molding a plastic drinks bottle Converters (sometimes known as processors) are companies or specialists that fabricate finished plastic products from raw materials, often in the form of resins, pellets, or films.

Injection molding : involves injecting molten plastic into a mold cavity under high pressure. The plastic solidifies in the mold to form the desired shape.

Blow molding : involves heating a plastic tube called a parison and inflating it inside a mold to form hollow products such as bottles and toys.

Rotational molding : involves rotating a mold on two axes while it is heated. Plastic powder is added to the mold and melts and sticks to the walls as the mold is rotated, which forms thick-walled hollow parts such as intermediate bulk containers .

Casting : involves pouring liquid resin into a mold where it solidifies into a predesigned shape.

Film blowing : involves heating a polymer and blowing it into a thin, continuous sheet. Commonly used for making polyethylene and polypropylene films used in packaging.

Spinning : involves transforming a polymer melt or solution into continuous strands 3D printing : involves three-dimensionally printing an object layer by layer following a digital model using computer-aided design software.

For thermosetting materials, the process is slightly different, as the plastics are liquid to begin with and but must be cured to give solid products, but much of the equipment is broadly similar.

The most commonly produced plastic consumer products include packaging made from LDPE (e.g. bags, containers, food packaging film), containers made from HDPE (e.g. milk bottles, shampoo bottles, ice cream tubs), and PET (e.g. bottles for water and other drinks). Together these products account for around 36% of plastics use in the world. Most of them (e.g. disposable cups, plates, cutlery, takeaway containers, carrier bags) are used for only a short period, many for less than a day. The use of plastics in building and construction, textiles, transportation and electrical equipment also accounts for a substantial share of the plastics market. Plastic items used for such purposes generally have longer life spans. They may be in use for periods ranging from around five years (e.g. textiles and electrical equipment) to more than 20 years (e.g. construction materials, industrial machinery).

[ 5 ] Plastic consumption differs among countries and communities, with some form of plastic having made its way into most people's lives. North America (i.e. the North American Free Trade Agreement or NAFTA region) accounts for 21% of global plastic consumption, closely followed by China (20%) and Western Europe (18%). In North America and Europe, there is high per capita plastic consumption (94 kg and 85 kg/capita/year, respectively). In China, there is lower per capita consumption (58 kg/capita/year), but high consumption nationally because of its large population.

[ 5 ] Gallery Water bottles made of PET High density polythene ( HDPE ) is used for making sturdy containers; transparent containers may be made of PET.

Disposable suits can be made from non-woven HDPE fabric.

Plastic mailing envelopes made of HDPE A Ziploc bag made of LDPE Food wrap made of LDPE Metalized polypropylene film is a commonly used snack pack material.

[ 32 ] Kinder Joy shell made of polypropylene A polypropylene chair Stools made of HDPE Expanded polystyrene foam ("Thermocol") Extruded polystyrene foam ("Styrofoam") Thermocol take-away food container Egg tray made of PETE A piece of packaging foam made of LDPE A kitchen sponge made of polyurethane foam Non-stick cookware with Teflon coating iPhone 5c , a smartphone with a polycarbonate "unibody" shell To withstand the extreme water pressure , this 10-meter deep Monterey Bay Aquarium tank has windows made of acrylic glass up to 33 cm thick.

PVC pipes PVC blister pack Applications The largest application for plastics is as packaging materials, but they are used in a wide range of other sectors, including: construction (pipes, gutters, door and windows), textiles ( stretchable fabrics , fleece ), consumer goods (toys, tableware, toothbrushes), transportation (headlights, bumpers, body panels , wing mirrors ), electronics (phones, computers, televisions) and as machine parts.

[ 17 ] In optics, plastics are used to manufacture aspheric lenses.

[ 33 ] This graph was using the legacy Graph extension , which is no longer supported. It needs to be converted to the new Chart extension .

This graph was using the legacy Graph extension , which is no longer supported. It needs to be converted to the new Chart extension .

Additives Additives are chemicals blended into plastics to improved their performance or appearance.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Additives are therefore one of the reasons why plastic is used so widely.

[ 36 ] Plastics are composed of chains of polymers. Many different chemicals are used as plastic additives. A randomly chosen plastic product generally contains around 20 additives. The identities and concentrations of additives are generally not listed on products.

[ 5 ] In the EU, over 400 additives are used in high volumes.

[ 37 ] [ 5 ] In a global market analysis, 5,500 additives were found.

[ 38 ] At a minimum, all plastic contains some polymer stabilizers which permit them to be melt-processed (molded) without suffering polymer degradation .Additives in polyvinyl chloride (PVC), used widely for sanitary plumbing, can constitute up to 80% of the total volume.

[ 5 ] Unadulterated plastic (barefoot resin) is rarely sold.

[ citation needed ] Leaching Additives may be weakly bound to the polymers or react in the polymer matrix. Although additives are blended into plastic they remain chemically distinct from it and can gradually leach back out during normal use, when in landfills, or following improper disposal in the environment.

[ 39 ] Additives may also degrade to form other compounds that could be more benign or more toxic. Plastic fragmentation into microplastics and nanoplastics can allow chemical additives to move in the environment far from the point of use. Once released, some additives and derivatives may persist in the environment and bioaccumulate in organisms. They can have adverse effects on human health and biota. A recent review by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) revealed that out of 3,377 chemicals potentially associated with plastic packaging and 906 likely associated with it, 68 were ranked by ECHA as "highest for human health hazards" and 68 as "highest for environmental hazards".

[ 5 ] Recycling Main article: Plastic recycling As additives change the properties of plastics they have to be considered during recycling. Presently, almost all recycling is performed by simply remelting and fabricating used plastic into new items. Additives present risks in recycled products due to their difficulty to remove. When plastic products are recycled, it is highly likely that the additives will be integrated into the new products. Plastic waste, even if it is all of the same polymer type, will contain varying types and amounts of additives. Mixing these together can give a material with inconsistent properties, which can be unappealing to industry. For example, mixing different colored plastics with different plastic colorants together can produce a discolored or brown material and for this reason plastic is usually sorted both by polymer type and color prior to recycling.

[ 5 ] Lack of transparency and reporting across the value chain often results in lack of knowledge concerning the chemical profile of the final products. For example, products containing brominated flame retardants have been incorporated into new plastic products. Flame retardants are a group of chemicals used in electronic and electrical equipment, textiles, furniture and construction materials which should not be present in food packaging or child care products. A recent study found brominated dioxins as unintentional contaminants in toys made from recycled plastic electronic waste that contained brominated flame retardants. Brominated dioxins have been found to exhibit toxicity similar to that of chlorinated dioxins. They can have negative developmental effects and negative effects on the nervous system and interfere with mechanisms of the endocrine system.

[ 5 ] Health effects Plastics have proliferated in part because they are relatively benign. They are not acutely toxic, in large part because they are insoluble and or indigestible owing to their large molecular weight . Their degradation products also are rarely toxic. The same cannot be said about some additives, which tend to be lower molecular weight.

Controversies associated with plastics often relate to their additives, some of which are potentially harmful.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 34 ] For example, some flame retardants, such as octabromodiphenyl ether and pentabromodiphenyl ether , are unsuitable for food packaging. Other harmful additives include cadmium , chromium , lead and mercury (regulated under the Minamata Convention on Mercury ), which have previously been used in plastic production, are banned in many jurisdictions. However, they are still routinely found in some plastic packaging, including for food.

[ citation needed ] Poor countries Additives can also be problematic if waste is burned, especially when burning is uncontrolled or takes place in low-technology incinerators, as is common in many developing countries. Incomplete combustion can cause emissions of hazardous substances such as acid gases and ash, which can contain persistent organic pollutants (POPs) such as dioxins .

[ 5 ] A number of additives identified as hazardous to humans and/or the environment are regulated internationally. The Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants is a global treaty to protect human health and the environment from chemicals that remain intact in the environment for long periods, become widely distributed geographically, accumulate in the fatty tissue of humans and wildlife, and have harmful impacts on human health or on the environment.

[ 5 ] The use of bisphenol A (BPA) in plastic baby bottles is banned in many parts of the world but is not restricted in some low-income countries.

[ 5 ] Animals In 2023, plasticosis , a new disease caused by the ingestion of plastic waste, was discovered in seabirds. Birds affected with this disease were found to have scarred and inflamed digestive tracts, which can impair their ability to digest food.

[ 42 ] "When birds ingest small pieces of plastic, they found, it inflames the digestive tract. Over time, the persistent inflammation causes tissues to become scarred and disfigured, affecting digestion, growth and survival." [ 43 ] Types of additive Additive type Typical concentration when present (%) [ 34 ] Description Example compounds Comment Share of global additive production (by weight) [ 17 ] Plasticizers 10–70 Plastics can be brittle, adding some plasticizer makes them more durable, adding lots makes them flexible Phthalates are the dominant class, safer alternatives include adipate esters ( DEHA , DOA ) and citrate esters ( ATBC and TEC ) 80–90% of world production is used in PVC, much of the rest is used in cellulose acetate . For most products loadings are between 10 and 35%, high loadings are used for plastisols 34% Flame retardants 1–30 Being petrochemicals, most plastics burn readily, flame retardants can prevent this Brominated flame retardants , chlorinated paraffins Non-chlorinated organophosphates are ecologically safer, though often less efficient 13% Heat stabilizers 0.3-5 Prevents heat related degradation Traditionally derivatives of lead, cadmium & tin. Safer modern alternatives include barium/zinc mixtures and calcium stearate , along with various synergists Almost exclusively used in PVC.

5% Fillers 0–50 Bulking agents. Can change appearance and mechanical properties, can lower price Calcium carbonate "chalk", talc , glass beads, carbon black . Also reinforcing fillers like carbon-fiber Most opaque plastic contains fillers. High levels can also protect against UV rays.

28% Impact modifiers 10–40 Improved toughness and resistance to damage [ 44 ] Typically some other elastomeric polymer, e.g. rubbers, styrene copolymers Chlorinated polyethylene is used for PVC 5% Antioxidants 0.05–3 Protects against degradation during processing Phenols , phosphite esters , certain thioethers The most widely used type of additives, all plastics will contain polymer stabilizers of some sort 6% Colorants 0.001-10 Imparts color Numerous dyes or pigments 2% Lubricants 0.1-3 Assist in forming/molding the plastic, includes processing aids (or flow aids), release agents , slip additives Hazardous PFASs .

Paraffin wax , wax esters , metal stearates (i.e.

zinc stearate ), long-chain fatty acid amides ( oleamide , erucamide) Very common. All examples form a coating between the plastic and machine parts during production. Reduces pressure and power usage in the extruder. Reduces imperfections.

2% Light stabilizers 0.05–3 Protects against UV damage HALS , UV blockers and quenchers Normally only used for items intended for outdoor use 1% Other Various Antimicrobials, antistatics , blowing agents , nucleating agents , clarifying agents 4% Health effects Plastics per se have low toxicity due to their insolubility in water and because they have a large molecular weight. They are biochemically inert. Additives in plastic products can be more problematic.

[ 45 ] For example, plasticizers like adipates and phthalates are often added to brittle plastics like PVC to make them pliable. Traces of these compounds can leach out of the product. Owing to concerns over the effects of such leachates , the EU has restricted the use of DEHP (di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate) and other phthalates in some applications, and the US has limited the use of DEHP, DPB , BBP , DINP , DIDP , and DnOP in children's toys and child-care articles through the Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act . Some compounds leaching from polystyrene food containers have been proposed to interfere with hormone functions and are suspected human carcinogens (cancer-causing substances).

[ 46 ] Other chemicals of potential concern include alkylphenols .

[ 41 ] While a finished plastic may be non-toxic, the monomers used in the manufacture of its parent polymers may be toxic. In some cases, small amounts of those chemicals can remain trapped in the product unless suitable processing is employed. For example, the World Health Organization 's International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) has recognized vinyl chloride , the precursor to PVC, as a human carcinogen.

[ 46 ] Bisphenol A (BPA) See also: Health effects of Bisphenol A Some plastic products degrade to chemicals with estrogenic activity.

[ 47 ] The primary building block of polycarbonates, bisphenol A (BPA), is an estrogen-like endocrine disruptor that may leach into food.

[ 46 ] Research in Environmental Health Perspectives finds that BPA leached from the lining of tin cans, dental sealants and polycarbonate bottles can increase the body weight of lab animals' offspring.

[ 48 ] A more recent animal study suggests that even low-level exposure to BPA results in insulin resistance, which can lead to inflammation and heart disease.

[ 49 ] As of January 2010, the Los Angeles Times reported that the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is spending $30 million to investigate indications of BPA's link to cancer.

[ 50 ] Bis(2-ethylhexyl) adipate , present in plastic wrap based on PVC, is also of concern, as are the volatile organic compounds present in new car smell . The EU has a permanent ban on the use of phthalates in toys. In 2009, the US government banned certain types of phthalates commonly used in plastic.

[ 51 ] Environmental effects See also: Plastic pollution , Marine debris , and Great Pacific Garbage Patch Because the chemical structure of most plastics renders them durable, they are resistant to many natural degradation processes. Much of this material may persist for centuries or longer, given the demonstrated persistence of structurally similar natural materials such as amber .

[ clarification needed ] Estimates differ as to the amount of plastic waste produced in the last century. By one estimate, one billion tons of plastic waste have been discarded since the 1950s.

[ 52 ] Others estimate a cumulative human production of 8.3-billion tons of plastic, of which 6.3-billion tons is waste, with only 9% getting recycled.

[ 53 ] It is estimated that this waste is made up of 81% polymer resin, 13% polymer fibers and 32% additives. In 2018 more than 343 million tons of plastic waste were generated, 90% of which was composed of post-consumer plastic waste (industrial, agricultural, commercial and municipal plastic waste). The rest was pre-consumer waste from resin production and manufacturing of plastic products (e.g. materials rejected due to unsuitable color, hardness, or processing characteristics).

[ 5 ] The Ocean Conservancy reported that China, Indonesia, Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam dump more plastic into the sea than all other countries combined.

[ 54 ] The rivers Yangtze, Indus, Yellow, Hai, Nile, Ganges, Pearl, Amur, Niger, and Mekong "transport 88% to 95% of the global [plastics] load into the sea." [ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ verify quote punctuation ] The presence of plastics, particularly microplastics , within the food chain is increasing. In the 1960s microplastics were observed in the guts of seabirds, and since then have been found in increasing concentrations.

[ 57 ] The long-term effects of plastics in the food chain are poorly understood. In 2009 it was estimated that 10% of modern waste was plastic, [ 58 ] although estimates vary according to region.

[ 57 ] Meanwhile, 50% to 80% of debris in marine areas is plastic.

[ 57 ] Plastic is often used in agriculture. There is more plastic in the soil than in the oceans. The presence of plastic in the environment hurts ecosystems and human health.

[ 59 ] Research on the environmental impacts has typically focused on the disposal phase. However, the production of plastics is also responsible for substantial environmental, health and socioeconomic impacts.

[ 60 ] Prior to the Montreal Protocol , CFCs had been commonly used in the manufacture of the plastic polystyrene, the production of which had contributed to depletion of the ozone layer .

Efforts to minimize environmental impact of plastics may include lowering of plastics production and use, waste- and recycling-policies, and the proactive development and deployment of alternatives to plastics such as for sustainable packaging .

[ citation needed ] Microplastics This section is an excerpt from Microplastics .

[ edit ] Microplastics in sediments from four rivers in Germany. Note the diverse shapes. White arrowheads indicate aluminium, glass and sand. (The white bars represent 1 mm for scale.) Photodegraded Plastic Straw. A light touch breaks larger straw into microplastics.

Microplastics are "synthetic solid particles or polymeric matrices, with regular or irregular shape and with size ranging from 1 μm to 5 mm, of either primary or secondary manufacturing origin, which are insoluble in water." [ 61 ] Microplastics cause pollution by entering natural ecosystems from a variety of sources, including cosmetics , clothing , construction , renovation , food packaging , and industrial processes.

The term microplastics is used to differentiate from larger, non-microscopic plastic waste . Two classifications of microplastics are currently recognized. Primary microplastics include any plastic fragments or particles that are already 5.0 mm in size or less before entering the environment . These include microfibers from clothing, microbeads , plastic glitter [ 62 ] and plastic pellets (also known as nurdles).

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] Secondary microplastics arise from the degradation (breakdown) of larger plastic products through natural weathering processes after entering the environment. Such sources of secondary microplastics include water and soda bottles, fishing nets, plastic bags, microwave containers , tea bags and tire wear.

[ 66 ] [ 65 ] [ 67 ] [ 68 ] Both types are recognized to persist in the environment at high levels, particularly in aquatic and marine ecosystems , where they cause water pollution .

[ 69 ] Approximately 35% of all ocean microplastics come from textiles/clothing, primarily due to the erosion of polyester , acrylic , or nylon -based clothing, often during the washing process.

[ 70 ] Microplastics also accumulate in the air and terrestrial ecosystems . Airborne microplastics have been detected in the atmosphere, as well as indoors and outdoors.

Because plastics degrade slowly (often over hundreds to thousands of years), [ 71 ] [ 72 ] microplastics have a high probability of ingestion, incorporation into, and accumulation in the bodies and tissues of many organisms. The toxic chemicals that come from both the ocean and runoff can also biomagnify up the food chain.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] In terrestrial ecosystems, microplastics have been demonstrated to reduce the viability of soil ecosystems.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] As of 2023, the cycle and movement of microplastics in the environment was not fully known. Microplastics in surface sample ocean surveys might have been underestimated as deep layer ocean sediment surveys in China found that plastics are present in deposition layers far older than the invention of plastics.

[ citation needed ] Microplastics are likely to degrade into smaller nanoplastics through chemical weathering processes, mechanical breakdown, and even through the digestive processes of animals. Nanoplastics are a subset of microplastics and they are smaller than 1 μm (1 micrometer or 1000 nm). Nanoplastics cannot be seen by the human eye.

[ 77 ] Decomposition of plastics Main article: Polymer degradation Plastics degrade by a variety of processes, the most significant of which is usually photo-oxidation . Their chemical structure determines their fate. Polymers' marine degradation takes much longer as a result of the saline environment and cooling effect of the sea, contributing to the persistence of plastic debris in certain environments.

[ 57 ] Recent studies have shown, however, that plastics in the ocean decompose faster than had been previously thought, due to exposure to the sun, rain, and other environmental conditions, resulting in the release of toxic chemicals such as bisphenol A . However, due to the increased volume of plastics in the ocean, decomposition has slowed down.

[ 78 ] The Marine Conservancy has predicted the decomposition rates of several plastic products: It is estimated that a foam plastic cup will take 50 years, a plastic beverage holder will take 400 years, a disposable diaper will take 450 years, and fishing line will take 600 years to degrade.

[ 79 ] Microbial species capable of degrading plastics are known to science, some of which are potentially useful for disposal of certain classes of plastic waste.

In 1975, a team of Japanese scientists studying ponds containing waste water from a nylon factory discovered a strain of Flavobacterium that digests certain byproducts of nylon 6 manufacture, such as the linear dimer of 6-aminohexanoate .

[ 80 ] Nylon 4 (polybutyrolactam) can be degraded by the ND-10 and ND-11 strands of Pseudomonas sp.

found in sludge, resulting in GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid) as a byproduct.

[ 81 ] Several species of soil fungi can consume polyurethane, [ 82 ] including two species of the Ecuadorian fungus Pestalotiopsis . They can consume polyurethane both aerobically and anaerobically (such as at the bottom of landfills).

[ 83 ] Methanogenic microbial consortia degrade styrene, using it as a carbon source.

[ 84 ] Pseudomonas putida can convert styrene oil into various biodegradable plastic|biodegradable polyhydroxyalkanoates .

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] Microbial communities isolated from soil samples mixed with starch have been shown to be capable of degrading polypropylene.

[ 87 ] The fungus Aspergillus fumigatus effectively degrades plasticized PVC.

[ 88 ] : 45–46 Phanerochaete chrysosporium has been grown on PVC in a mineral salt agar.

[ 88 ] : 76 P. chrysosporium , Lentinus tigrinus , A. niger , and A. sydowii can also effectively degrade PVC.

[ 88 ] : 122 Phenol-formaldehyde, commonly known as Bakelite, is degraded by the white rot fungus P. chrysosporium .

[ 89 ] Acinetobacter has been found to partially degrade low-molecular-weight polyethylene oligomers .

[ 81 ] When used in combination, Pseudomonas fluorescens and Sphingomonas can degrade over 40% of the weight of plastic bags in less than three months.

[ 90 ] The thermophilic bacterium Brevibacillus borstelensis (strain 707) was isolated from a soil sample and found capable of using low-density polyethylene as a sole carbon source when incubated at 50 °C. Pre-exposure of the plastic to ultraviolet radiation broke chemical bonds and aided biodegradation; the longer the period of UV exposure, the greater the promotion of the degradation.

[ 91 ] Hazardous molds have been found aboard space stations that degrade rubber into a digestible form.

[ 92 ] Several species of yeasts, bacteria, algae and lichens have been found growing on synthetic polymer artifacts in museums and at archaeological sites.

[ 93 ] In the plastic-polluted waters of the Sargasso Sea , bacteria have been found that consume various types of plastic; however, it is unknown to what extent these bacteria effectively clean up poisons rather than simply release them into the marine microbial ecosystem.

Plastic-eating microbes also have been found in landfills.

[ 94 ] Nocardia can degrade PET with an esterase enzyme.

[ 95 ] The fungus Geotrichum candidum , found in Belize, has been found to consume the polycarbonate plastic found in CDs.

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] Futuro houses are made of fiberglass-reinforced polyesters, polyester-polyurethane, and PMMA. One such house was found to be harmfully degraded by Cyanobacteria and Archaea .

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] Manual material triage for recycling Recycling This section is an excerpt from Plastic recycling .

[ edit ] Plastic recycling Clockwise from top left: Sorting plastic waste at a single-stream recycling centre Baled colour-sorted used bottles Recovered HDPE ready for recycling A watering can made from recycled bottles Plastic recycling is the processing of plastic waste into other products.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] [ 102 ] Recycling can reduce dependence on landfills , conserve resources and protect the environment from plastic pollution and greenhouse gas emissions.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] [ 105 ] Recycling rates lag behind those of other recoverable materials, such as aluminium , glass and paper . From the start of plastic production through to 2015, the world produced around 6.3 billion tonnes of plastic waste, only 9% of which has been recycled and only ~1% has been recycled more than once.

[ 106 ] Of the remaining waste, 12% was incinerated and 79% was either sent to landfills or lost to the environment as pollution.

[ 106 ] Almost all plastic is non- biodegradable and without recycling, spreads across the environment [ 107 ] [ 108 ] where it causes plastic pollution . For example, as of 2015, approximately 8 million tonnes of waste plastic enters the oceans annually, damaging oceanic ecosystems and forming ocean garbage patches .

[ 109 ] Almost all recycling is mechanical and involves the melting and reforming of plastic into other items. This can cause polymer degradation at the molecular level, and requires that waste be sorted by colour and polymer type before processing, which is often complicated and expensive. Errors can lead to material with inconsistent properties, rendering it unappealing to industry.

[ 110 ] Though filtration in mechanical recycling reduces microplastic release, even the most efficient filtration systems cannot prevent the release of microplastics into wastewater.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] In feedstock recycling, waste plastic is converted into its starting chemicals, which can then become fresh plastic. This involves higher energy and capital costs . Alternatively, plastic can be burned in place of fossil fuels in energy recovery facilities , or biochemically converted into other useful chemicals for industry.

[ 113 ] In some countries, burning is the dominant form of plastic waste disposal, particularly where landfill diversion policies are in place.

Plastic recycling is low in the waste hierarchy , meaning that reduction and reuse are more favourable and long-term solutions for sustainability .

It has been advocated since the early 1970s, [ 114 ] but due to economic and technical challenges, did not impact the management of plastic waste to any significant extent until the late 1980s.

Pyrolysis By heating to above 500 °C (932 °F) in the absence of oxygen ( pyrolysis ), plastics can be broken down into simpler hydrocarbons , which can be used as feedstocks for the fabrication of new plastics.

[ 115 ] These hydrocarbons can also be used as fuels.

[ 116 ] Greenhouse gas emissions See also: Ethylene § Greenhouse_gas_emissions , and Plastic_pollution § Plastic_pollution_as_a_cause_of_climate_change According to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development , plastic contributed greenhouse gases in the equivalent of 1.8 billion tons of carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) to the atmosphere in 2019, 3.4% of global emissions.

[ 117 ] They say that by 2060, plastic could emit 4.3 billion tons of greenhouse gas a year. The effect of plastics on global warming is mixed. Plastics are generally made from fossil gas or petroleum; thus, the production of plastics creates further fugitive emissions of methane when the fossil gas or petroleum is produced. Additionally, much of the energy used in plastic production is not sustainable energy ; for example, high temperature from burning fossil gas. However, plastics can also limit methane emissions; for example, packaging to reduce food waste.

[ 118 ] A study from 2024 found that compared to glass and aluminum, plastic may actually have less of a negative effect on the environment and therefore might be the best option for must food packaging and other common uses.

[ 119 ] The study found that, "replacing plastics with alternatives is worse for greenhouse gas emissions in most cases." and that the study involving European researchers found, "15 of the 16 applications a plastic product incurs fewer greenhouse gas emissions than their alternatives." [ 119 ] Production of plastics Production of plastics from crude oil requires 7.9 to 13.7 kWh/lb (taking into account the average efficiency of US utility stations of 35%). Producing silicon and semiconductors for modern electronic equipment is even more energy consuming: 29.2 to 29.8 kWh/lb for silicon, and about 381 kWh/lb for semiconductors.

[ 120 ] This is much higher than the energy needed to produce many other materials. For example, to produce iron (from iron ore) requires 2.5-3.2 kWh/lb of energy; glass (from sand, etc.) 2.3–4.4 kWh/lb; steel (from iron) 2.5–6.4 kWh/lb; and paper (from timber) 3.2–6.4 kWh/lb.

[ 121 ] Incineration of plastics Quickly burning plastics at very high temperatures breaks down many toxic components, such as dioxins and furans . This approach is widely used in municipal solid waste incineration . Municipal solid waste incinerators also normally treat the flue gas to decrease pollutants further, which is needed because uncontrolled incineration of plastic produces carcinogenic polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins .

[ 122 ] Open-air burning of plastic occurs at lower temperatures and normally releases such toxic fumes.

In the European Union , municipal waste incineration is regulated by the Industrial Emissions Directive , [ 123 ] which stipulates a minimum temperature of 850 °C for at least two seconds.

[ 124 ] Facilitation of natural degradation The bacterium Blaptica dubia is claimed to help degradation of commercial polysterene. This biodegradation seems to occur in some plastic degrading bacteria inhabiting the gut of cockroaches. The biodegradation products have been found in their feces too.

[ 125 ] History For a chronological guide, see Timeline of plastic development .

The development of plastics has evolved from the use of naturally plastic materials (e.g., gums and shellac ) to the use of the chemical modification of those materials (e.g., natural rubber, cellulose , collagen , and milk proteins ), and finally to completely synthetic plastics (e.g., bakelite, epoxy, and PVC). Early plastics were bio-derived materials such as egg and blood proteins, which are organic polymers . In around 1600 BC, Mesoamericans used natural rubber for balls, bands, and figurines.

[ 6 ] Treated cattle horns were used as windows for lanterns in the Middle Ages .

[ citation needed ] Materials that mimicked the properties of horns were developed by treating milk proteins with lye. In the nineteenth century, as chemistry developed during the Industrial Revolution , many materials were reported. The development of plastics accelerated with Charles Goodyear 's 1839 discovery of vulcanization to harden natural rubber.

Plaque commemorating Parkes at the Birmingham Science Museum Parkesine , invented by Alexander Parkes in 1855 and patented the following year, [ 126 ] is considered the first man-made plastic. It was manufactured from cellulose (the major component of plant cell walls) treated with nitric acid as a solvent. The output of the process (commonly known as cellulose nitrate or pyroxilin) could be dissolved in alcohol and hardened into a transparent and elastic material that could be molded when heated.

[ 127 ] By incorporating pigments into the product, it could be made to resemble ivory. Parkesine was unveiled at the 1862 International Exhibition in London and garnered for Parkes the bronze medal.

[ 128 ] In 1893, French chemist Auguste Trillat discovered the means to insolubilize casein (milk proteins) by immersion in formaldehyde , producing material marketed as galalith .

[ 129 ] In 1897, mass-printing press owner Wilhelm Krische of Hanover, Germany, was commissioned to develop an alternative to blackboards.

[ 129 ] The resultant horn-like plastic made from casein was developed in cooperation with the Austrian chemist (Friedrich) Adolph Spitteler (1846–1940). Although unsuitable for the intended purpose, other uses would be discovered.

[ 129 ] The world's first fully synthetic plastic was Bakelite , invented in New York in 1907 by Leo Baekeland , [ 7 ] who coined the term plastics .

[ 8 ] Many chemists have contributed to the materials science of plastics, including Nobel laureate Hermann Staudinger , who has been called "the father of polymer chemistry ", and Herman Mark , known as "the father of polymer physics ".

[ 9 ] After World War I, improvements in chemistry led to an explosion of new forms of plastics, with mass production beginning in the 1940s and 1950s.

[ 58 ] Among the earliest examples in the wave of new polymers were polystyrene (first produced by BASF in the 1930s) [ 6 ] and polyvinyl chloride (first created in 1872 but commercially produced in the late 1920s).

[ 6 ] In 1923, Durite Plastics, Inc., was the first manufacturer of phenol-furfural resins.

[ 130 ] In 1933, polyethylene was discovered by Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI) researchers Reginald Gibson and Eric Fawcett.

[ 6 ] The discovery of polyethylene terephthalate (PETE) is credited to employees of the Calico Printers' Association in the UK in 1941; it was licensed to DuPont for the US and ICI otherwise, and as one of the few plastics appropriate as a replacement for glass in many circumstances, resulting in widespread use for bottles in Europe.

[ 6 ] In 1954 polypropylene was discovered by Giulio Natta and began to be manufactured in 1957.

[ 6 ] Also in 1954 expanded polystyrene (used for building insulation, packaging, and cups) was invented by Dow Chemical .

[ 6 ] Since the 1960s, plastic production has surged with the advent of polycarbonate and HDPE, widely used in various products.

[ 131 ] In the 1980s and 1990s, plastic recycling and the development of biodegradable plastics began to flourish to mitigate environmental impacts.

[ 132 ] [ 133 ] From 2000 to the present, bioplastics from renewable sources and awareness of microplastics have spurred extensive research and policies to control plastic pollution.

[ 134 ] Policy See also: Global plastic pollution treaty Work is currently underway to develop a global treaty on plastic pollution . On March 2, 2022, UN Member States voted at the resumed fifth UN Environment Assembly (UNEA-5.2) to establish an Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (INC) with the mandate of advancing a legally-binding international agreement on plastics.

[ 135 ] The resolution is entitled "End plastic pollution: Towards an international legally binding instrument." The mandate specifies that the INC must begin its work by the end of 2022 with the goal of "completing a draft global legally binding agreement by the end of 2024." [ 136 ] See also American Recyclable Plastic Bag Alliance – Manufacturers and recyclers' lobby group Corn construction – Use of corn (maize) in construction Light activated resin – Resin that cures when exposed to light of appropriate wavelengths Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Organic light emitting diode – Diode that emits light from an organic compound Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Plastic film – Thin continuous polymeric material Plastic pollution – Accumulation of plastic in natural ecosystems Plastics engineering – Engineering field studying polymer materials Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Plasticulture – Use of plastic materials in agriculture Plastisphere – Plastic debris suspended in water and organisms which live in it Refill (scheme) – British environmental campaign Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Roll-to-roll processing Self-healing plastic – Substances that can repair themselves Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Thermal cleaning – Industrial cleaning techniques Thermoforming – Manufacturing process for molding plastic with heat Timeline of materials technology – Tools Pages displaying short descriptions with no spaces Plastic in the sense of malleable Plastic arts – Art that involves physical manipulation Plastic ratio – Number, approximately 1.3247 References ^ a b Elias, Hans-Georg; Mülhaupt, Rolf (2015). "Plastics, General Survey, 1. Definition, Molecular Structure and Properties".

Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry . pp.

1– 70.

doi : 10.1002/14356007.a20_543.pub2 .

ISBN 978-3-527-30673-2 .

^ "Life Cycle of a Plastic Product" .

Americanchemistry.com . Archived from the original on March 17, 2010 . Retrieved July 1, 2011 .

^ a b "Global plastic production with projections, 1950 to 2060" .

Our World In Data . April 13, 2023 . Retrieved January 6, 2025 .

^ "The environmental impacts of plastics and micro-plastics use, waste and pollution: EU and national measures" (PDF) .

europarl.europa.eu . October 2020.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r Environment, U. N. (October 21, 2021).

"Drowning in Plastics – Marine Litter and Plastic Waste Vital Graphics" .

UNEP - UN Environment Programme . Retrieved March 21, 2022 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Andrady AL, Neal MA (July 2009).

"Applications and societal benefits of plastics" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences .

364 (1526): 1977– 84.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2008.0304 .

PMC 2873019 .

PMID 19528050 .

^ a b American Chemical Society National Historic Chemical Landmarks.

"Bakelite: The World's First Synthetic Plastic" . Retrieved February 23, 2015 .

^ a b Edgar D, Edgar R (2009).

Fantastic Recycled Plastic: 30 Clever Creations to Spark Your Imagination . Sterling Publishing Company, Inc.

ISBN 978-1-60059-342-0 – via Google Books.

^ a b Teegarden DM (2004).

Polymer Chemistry: Introduction to an Indispensable Science . NSTA Press.

ISBN 978-0-87355-221-9 – via Google Books.

^ "Plastikos" πλαστι^κ-ός .

Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek–English Lexicon . Retrieved July 1, 2011 .

^ "Plastic" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved July 29, 2021 .

^ Ebbing D, Gammon SD (2016).

General Chemistry . Cengage Learning.

ISBN 978-1-305-88729-9 .

^ "Classification of Plastics" .

Joanne and Steffanie's Plastics Web Site . Archived from the original on December 15, 2007 . Retrieved July 1, 2011 .

^ Kent R.

"Periodic Table of Polymers" .

Plastics Consultancy Network . Archived from the original on July 3, 2008.

^ "Composition and Types of Plastic" .

Infoplease . Archived from the original on October 15, 2012 . Retrieved September 29, 2009 .

^ Gilleo K (2004).

Area Array Packaging Processes: For BGA, Flip Chip, and CSP . McGraw Hill Professional.

ISBN 978-0-07-142829-3 – via Google Books.

^ a b c d e Geyer, Roland; Jambeck, Jenna R.

; Law, Kara Lavender (July 2017).

"Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made" .

Science Advances .

3 (7): e1700782.

Bibcode : 2017SciA....3E0782G .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.1700782 .

PMC 5517107 .

PMID 28776036 .

^ The majority of polyurethanes are thermosets, however some thermoplastics are also produced, for instance spandex ^ PP&A stand for polyester , polyamide and acrylate polymers ; all of which are used to make synthetic fibers . Care should be taken not to confuse it with polyphthalamide (PPA) ^ "Plastic Recycling Factsheet" (PDF) . EuRIC - European Recycling Industries’ Confederation . Retrieved November 9, 2021 .

^ "Polymers in aerospace applications" . Euroshore . Retrieved June 2, 2021 .

^ Kutz M (2002).

Handbook of Materials Selection . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-0-471-35924-1 – via Google Books.

^ Heeger AJ, Kivelson S, Schrieffer JR, Su WP (1988). "Solitons in Conducting Polymers".

Reviews of Modern Physics .

60 (3): 781– 850.

Bibcode : 1988RvMP...60..781H .

doi : 10.1103/RevModPhys.60.781 .

^ "Properties of Copper" .

Copper Development Association .

^ Brandl H, Püchner P (1992). "Biodegradation Biodegradation of Plastic Bottles Made from 'Biopol' in an Aquatic Ecosystem Under In Situ Conditions".

Biodegradation .

2 (4): 237– 43.

doi : 10.1007/BF00114555 .

S2CID 37486324 .

^ "Biochemical Opportunities in the UK, NNFCC 08-008 — NNFCC" . Archived from the original on July 20, 2011 . Retrieved March 24, 2011 .

^ "Bioplastics industry shows dynamic growth" .

Packaging Europe . December 5, 2019.

^ "Becoming Employed in a Growing Bioplastics Industry - bioplastics MAGAZINE" .

www.bioplasticsmagazine.com .

^ Galie F (November 2016).

"Global Market Trends and Investments in Polyethylene and Polyproplyene" (PDF) .

ICIS Whitepaper . Reed business Information, Inc . Retrieved December 16, 2017 .

^ "Top 100 Producers: The Minderoo Foundation" .

www.minderoo.org . Retrieved October 14, 2021 .

^ a b "Plastics – the Facts 2020" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on October 7, 2021.

^ "Sustainable packaging materials for snacks" . October 28, 2021. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021 . Retrieved September 10, 2022 .

^ Paschotta, Dr Rüdiger.

"plastic optics" .

www.rp-photonics.com . Retrieved October 7, 2024 .

^ a b c Hahladakis JN, Velis CA, Weber R, Iacovidou E, Purnell P (February 2018).

"An overview of chemical additives present in plastics: Migration, release, fate and environmental impact during their use, disposal and recycling" .

Journal of Hazardous Materials .

344 : 179– 199.

Bibcode : 2018JHzM..344..179H .

doi : 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2017.10.014 .

PMID 29035713 .

^ Marturano, Valentina; Cerruti, Pierfrancesco; Ambrogi, Veronica (June 27, 2017).

"Polymer additives" .

Physical Sciences Reviews .

2 (6): 130.

Bibcode : 2017PhSRv...2..130M .

doi : 10.1515/psr-2016-0130 .

S2CID 199059895 .

^ Pfaendner, Rudolf (September 2006). "How will additives shape the future of plastics?".

Polymer Degradation and Stability .

91 (9): 2249– 2256.

doi : 10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2005.10.017 .

^ "Mapping exercise – Plastic additives initiative - ECHA" .

echa.europa.eu . Retrieved May 3, 2022 .

^ Wiesinger, Helene; Wang, Zhanyun; Hellweg, Stefanie (July 6, 2021). "Deep Dive into Plastic Monomers, Additives, and Processing Aids".

Environmental Science & Technology .

55 (13): 9339– 9351.

Bibcode : 2021EnST...55.9339W .

doi : 10.1021/acs.est.1c00976 .

hdl : 20.500.11850/495854 .

PMID 34154322 .

S2CID 235597312 .

^ "Emission Scenario Documents: N°3 Plastic Additives (2004, revised in 2009)" . Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development . Retrieved May 19, 2022 .

^ Elias, Hans-Georg; Mülhaupt, Rolf (April 14, 2015). "Plastics, General Survey, 1. Definition, Molecular Structure and Properties".

Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry : 1– 70.

doi : 10.1002/14356007.a20_543.pub2 .

ISBN 9783527306732 .

^ a b Teuten EL, Saquing JM, Knappe DR, Barlaz MA, Jonsson S, Björn A, et al. (July 2009).

"Transport and release of chemicals from plastics to the environment and to wildlife" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences .

364 (1526): 2027– 45.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2008.0284 .

PMC 2873017 .

PMID 19528054 .

^ "New disease caused by plastics discovered in seabirds" .

The Guardian . March 3, 2023 . Retrieved March 4, 2023 .

^ "New disease caused solely by plastics discovered in seabirds" . Natural History Museum. March 3, 2023 . Retrieved March 4, 2023 .

^ "Impact modifiers: how to make your compound tougher".

Plastics, Additives and Compounding .

6 (3): 46– 49. May 2004.

doi : 10.1016/S1464-391X(04)00203-X .

^ Hahladakis JN, Velis CA, Weber R, Iacovidou E, Purnell P (February 2018).

"An overview of chemical additives present in plastics: Migration, release, fate and environmental impact during their use, disposal and recycling" .

Journal of Hazardous Materials .

344 : 179– 199.

Bibcode : 2018JHzM..344..179H .

doi : 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2017.10.014 .

PMID 29035713 .

^ a b c McRandle PW (March–April 2004).

"Plastic Water Bottles" .

National Geographic . Retrieved November 13, 2007 .

^ Yang CZ, Yaniger SI, Jordan VC, Klein DJ, Bittner GD (July 2011).

"Most plastic products release estrogenic chemicals: a potential health problem that can be solved" .

Environmental Health Perspectives .

119 (7): 989– 96.

Bibcode : 2011EnvHP.119..989Y .

doi : 10.1289/ehp.1003220 .

PMC 3222987 .

PMID 21367689 .

^ Rubin BS, Murray MK, Damassa DA, King JC, Soto AM (July 2001).

"Perinatal exposure to low doses of bisphenol A affects body weight, patterns of estrous cyclicity, and plasma LH levels" .

Environmental Health Perspectives .

109 (7): 675– 80.

doi : 10.2307/3454783 .

JSTOR 3454783 .

PMC 1240370 .

PMID 11485865 .

^ Alonso-Magdalena P, Morimoto S, Ripoll C, Fuentes E, Nadal A (January 2006).

"The estrogenic effect of bisphenol A disrupts pancreatic beta-cell function in vivo and induces insulin resistance" .

Environmental Health Perspectives .

114 (1): 106– 12.

Bibcode : 2006EnvHP.114..106A .

doi : 10.1289/ehp.8451 .

PMC 1332664 .

PMID 16393666 . Archived from the original on January 19, 2009.

^ Zajac A (January 16, 2010).

"FDA Issues BPA Guidelines" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved July 29, 2021 .

^ McCormick LW (October 30, 2009).

"More Kids' Products Found Containing Unsafe Chemicals" .

ConsumerAffairs.com .

^ Weisman A (2007).

The world without us . New York: Thomas Dunne Books/St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 978-1-4434-0008-4 .

^ Geyer R, Jambeck JR, Law KL (July 2017).

"Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made" .

Science Advances .

3 (7): e1700782.

Bibcode : 2017SciA....3E0782G .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.1700782 .

PMC 5517107 .

PMID 28776036 .

^ Leung H (April 21, 2018).

"Five Asian Countries Dump More Plastic Into Oceans Than Anyone Else Combined: How You Can Help" .

Forbes . Retrieved June 23, 2019 .

China, Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam are dumping more plastic into oceans than the rest of the world combined, according to a 2017 report by Ocean Conservancy ^ Schmidt C, Krauth T, Wagner S (November 2017).

"Export of Plastic Debris by Rivers into the Sea" (PDF) .

Environmental Science & Technology .

51 (21): 12246– 12253.

Bibcode : 2017EnST...5112246S .

doi : 10.1021/acs.est.7b02368 .

PMID 29019247 .

The 10 top-ranked rivers transport 88–95% of the global load into the sea ^ Franzen H (November 30, 2017).

"Almost all plastic in the ocean comes from just 10 rivers" .

Deutsche Welle . Retrieved December 18, 2018 .

It turns out that about 90 percent of all the plastic that reaches the world's oceans gets flushed through just 10 rivers: The Yangtze, the Indus, Yellow River, Hai River, the Nile, the Ganges, Pearl River, Amur River, the Niger, and the Mekong (in that order).

^ a b c d Barnes DK, Galgani F, Thompson RC, Barlaz M (July 2009).

"Accumulation and fragmentation of plastic debris in global environments" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences .

364 (1526): 1985– 98.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2008.0205 .

PMC 2873009 .

PMID 19528051 .

^ a b Thompson RC, Swan SH, Moore CJ, vom Saal FS (July 2009).

"Our plastic age" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences .

364 (1526): 1973– 6.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2009.0054 .

PMC 2874019 .

PMID 19528049 .

^ Carrington, Damian (December 7, 2021).

" 'Disastrous' plastic use in farming threatens food safety – UN" . The Guardian . Retrieved December 8, 2021 .

^ Cabernard, Livia; Pfister, Stephan; Oberschelp, Christopher; Hellweg, Stefanie (December 2, 2021).

"Growing environmental footprint of plastics driven by coal combustion" .

Nature Sustainability .

5 (2): 139– 148.

Bibcode : 2021NatSu...5..139C .

doi : 10.1038/s41893-021-00807-2 .

hdl : 20.500.11850/518642 .

ISSN 2398-9629 .

S2CID 244803448 .

^ Boctor, Joseph (2025).

"Microplastics and nanoplastics: fate, transport, and governance from agricultural soil to food webs and humans" .

Environmental Science Europe .

37 (1) 68.

Bibcode : 2025ESEur..37...68B .

doi : 10.1186/s12302-025-01104-x .

^ Green, Dannielle Senga; Jefferson, Megan; Boots, Bas; Stone, Leon (January 2021). "All that glitters is litter? Ecological impacts of conventional versus biodegradable glitter in a freshwater habitat".

Journal of Hazardous Materials .

402 124070.

Bibcode : 2021JHzM..40224070G .

doi : 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.124070 .

PMID 33254837 .

^ Cole, M; Lindeque, P; Fileman, E; Halsband, C; Goodhead, R; Moger, J; Galloway, TS (2013).

"Microplastic Ingestion by Zooplankton" (PDF) .

Environmental Science & Technology .

47 (12): 6646– 6655.

Bibcode : 2013EnST...47.6646C .

doi : 10.1021/es400663f .

hdl : 10871/19651 .

PMID 23692270 .

^ "Where Does Marine Litter Come From?" .

Marine Litter Facts . British Plastics Federation.

Archived from the original on May 18, 2021 . Retrieved September 25, 2018 .

^ a b Boucher, Julien; Friot, Damien (2017).

Primary microplastics in the oceans: A global evaluation of sources .

doi : 10.2305/IUCN.CH.2017.01.en .

ISBN 978-2-8317-1827-9 .

^ Kovochich, M; Liong, M; Parker, JA; Oh, SC; Lee, JP; Xi, L; Kreider, ML; Unice, KM (February 2021).

"Chemical mapping of tire and road wear particles for single particle analysis" .

Science of the Total Environment .

757 144085.

Bibcode : 2021ScTEn.75744085K .

doi : 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.144085 .

PMID 33333431 .

^ Conkle, Jeremy L.; Báez Del Valle, Christian D.; Turner, Jeffrey W. (2018). "Are We Underestimating Microplastic Contamination in Aquatic Environments?".

Environmental Management .

61 (1): 1– 8.

Bibcode : 2018EnMan..61....1C .

doi : 10.1007/s00267-017-0947-8 .

PMID 29043380 .

^ "Plastic free July: How to stop accidentally consuming plastic particles from packaging" .

Stuff . July 11, 2019.

Archived from the original on November 4, 2021 . Retrieved April 13, 2021 .

^ "Development solutions: Building a better ocean" .

European Investment Bank .

Archived from the original on October 21, 2021 . Retrieved August 19, 2020 .

^ Resnick, Brian (September 19, 2018).

"More than ever, our clothes are made of plastic. Just washing them can pollute the oceans" .

Vox .

^ Chamas, Ali; Moon, Hyunjin; Zheng, Jiajia; Qiu, Yang; Tabassum, Tarnuma; Jang, Jun Hee; Abu-Omar, Mahdi; Scott, Susannah L.; Suh, Sangwon (2020).

"Degradation Rates of Plastics in the Environment" .

ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering .

8 (9): 3494– 3511.

doi : 10.1021/acssuschemeng.9b06635 .

^ Klein S, Dimzon IK, Eubeler J, Knepper TP (2018). "Analysis, Occurrence, and Degradation of Microplastics in the Aqueous Environment". In Wagner M, Lambert S (eds.).

Freshwater Microplastics . The Handbook of Environmental Chemistry. Vol. 58. Cham.: Springer. pp.

51– 67.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-61615-5_3 .

ISBN 978-3-319-61614-8 .

See Section 3, "Environmental Degradation of Synthetic Polymers".

^ Grossman, Elizabeth (January 15, 2015).

"How Plastics from Your Clothes Can End up in Your Fish" .

Time .

Archived from the original on November 18, 2020 . Retrieved March 15, 2015 .

^ "How Long Does it Take Trash to Decompose" .

4Ocean . January 20, 2017. Archived from the original on September 25, 2018 . Retrieved September 25, 2018 .

^ "Why food's plastic problem is bigger than we realise" .

www.bbc.com .

Archived from the original on November 18, 2021 . Retrieved March 27, 2021 .

^ Nex, Sally (2021).

How to garden the low carbon way: the steps you can take to help combat climate change (First American ed.). New York: DK.

ISBN 978-0-7440-2928-4 .

OCLC 1241100709 .

^ "Microplastics Research" .

US EPA . April 22, 2022 . Retrieved December 16, 2024 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ American Chemical Society.

"Plastics In Oceans Decompose, Release Hazardous Chemicals, Surprising New Study Says" .

Science Daily . Retrieved March 15, 2015 .

^ Le Guern C (March 2018).

"When The Mermaids Cry: The Great Plastic Tide" .

Coastal Care .

Archived from the original on April 5, 2018 . Retrieved November 10, 2018 .

^ Kinoshita S, Kageyama S, Iba K, Yamada Y, Okada H (1975).

"Utilization of a Cyclic Dimer and Linear Oligomers of E-Aminocaproic Acid by Achromobacter Guttatus" .

Agricultural and Biological Chemistry .

39 (6): 1219– 1223.

doi : 10.1271/bbb1961.39.1219 .

^ a b Tokiwa Y , Calabia BP, Ugwu CU, Aiba S (August 2009).

"Biodegradability of plastics" .

International Journal of Molecular Sciences .

10 (9): 3722– 42.

doi : 10.3390/ijms10093722 .

PMC 2769161 .

PMID 19865515 .

^ Russell JR, Huang J, Anand P, Kucera K, Sandoval AG, Dantzler KW, et al. (September 2011).

"Biodegradation of polyester polyurethane by endophytic fungi" .

Applied and Environmental Microbiology .

77 (17): 6076– 84.

Bibcode : 2011ApEnM..77.6076R .

doi : 10.1128/aem.00521-11 .

PMC 3165411 .

PMID 21764951 .

^ Russell JR, Huang J, Anand P, Kucera K, Sandoval AG, Dantzler KW, et al. (September 2011).

"Biodegradation of polyester polyurethane by endophytic fungi" .

Applied and Environmental Microbiology .

77 (17): 6076– 84.

Bibcode : 2011ApEnM..77.6076R .

doi : 10.1128/AEM.00521-11 .

PMC 3165411 .

PMID 21764951 .

^ "Deep Geologic Repository Project" (PDF) .

Ceaa-acee.gc.ca . Retrieved April 18, 2017 .

^ Roy R (March 7, 2006).

"Immortal Polystyrene Foam Meets its Enemy" .

Livescience.com . Retrieved April 18, 2017 .

^ Ward PG, Goff M, Donner M, Kaminsky W, O'Connor KE (April 2006). "A two step chemo-biotechnological conversion of polystyrene to a biodegradable thermoplastic".

Environmental Science & Technology .

40 (7): 2433– 7.

Bibcode : 2006EnST...40.2433W .

doi : 10.1021/es0517668 .

PMID 16649270 .

^ Cacciari I, Quatrini P, Zirletta G, Mincione E, Vinciguerra V, Lupattelli P, Giovannozzi Sermanni G (November 1993).

"Isotactic polypropylene biodegradation by a microbial community: physicochemical characterization of metabolites produced" .

Applied and Environmental Microbiology .

59 (11): 3695– 700.

Bibcode : 1993ApEnM..59.3695C .

doi : 10.1128/AEM.59.11.3695-3700.1993 .

PMC 182519 .

PMID 8285678 .

^ a b c Ishtiaq AM (2011).

Microbial Degradation of Polyvinyl Chloride Plastics (PDF) (Ph.D.). Islamabad: Quaid-i-Azam University. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 24, 2013 . Retrieved December 23, 2013 .

^ Gusse AC, Miller PD, Volk TJ (July 2006). "White-rot fungi demonstrate first biodegradation of phenolic resin".

Environmental Science & Technology .

40 (13): 4196– 9.

Bibcode : 2006EnST...40.4196G .

doi : 10.1021/es060408h .

PMID 16856735 .

^ "CanadaWorld – WCI student isolates microbe that lunches on plastic bags" . The Record.com. Archived from the original on July 18, 2011.

^ Hadad D, Geresh S, Sivan A (2005). "Biodegradation of polyethylene by the thermophilic bacterium Brevibacillus borstelensis".

Journal of Applied Microbiology .

98 (5): 1093– 100.

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2005.02553.x .

PMID 15836478 .

S2CID 2977246 .

^ Bell TE (2007).

"Preventing "Sick" Spaceships" .

^ Cappitelli F, Sorlini C (February 2008).

"Microorganisms attack synthetic polymers in items representing our cultural heritage" .

Applied and Environmental Microbiology .

74 (3): 564– 9.

Bibcode : 2008ApEnM..74..564C .

doi : 10.1128/AEM.01768-07 .

PMC 2227722 .

PMID 18065627 .

^ Zaikab GD (March 2011).

"Marine Microbes Digest Plastic" .

Nature .

doi : 10.1038/news.2011.191 .

^ Sharon, Chetna; Sharon, Madhuri (2012).

"Studies on Biodegradation of Polyethylene terephthalate: A synthetic polymer" .

Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology Research .

2 (2) – via ResearchGate .

^ Bosch X (2001).

"Fungus Eats CD" .

Nature .

doi : 10.1038/news010628-11 .

^ "Fungus 'Eats' CDs" .

BBC News . June 22, 2001.

^ Cappitelli F, Principi P, Sorlini C (August 2006). "Biodeterioration of modern materials in contemporary collections: can biotechnology help?".

Trends in Biotechnology .

24 (8): 350– 4.

doi : 10.1016/j.tibtech.2006.06.001 .

PMID 16782219 .

^ Rinaldi A (November 2006).

"Saving a fragile legacy. Biotechnology and microbiology are increasingly used to preserve and restore the world's cultural heritage" .

EMBO Reports .

7 (11): 1075– 9.

doi : 10.1038/sj.embor.7400844 .

PMC 1679785 .

PMID 17077862 .

^ Al-Salem, S.M.; Lettieri, P.; Baeyens, J. (October 2009). "Recycling and recovery routes of plastic solid waste (PSW): A review".

Waste Management .

29 (10): 2625– 2643.

Bibcode : 2009WaMan..29.2625A .

doi : 10.1016/j.wasman.2009.06.004 .

PMID 19577459 .

^ Ignatyev, I.A.; Thielemans, W.; Beke, B. Vander (2014). "Recycling of Polymers: A Review".

ChemSusChem .

7 (6): 1579– 1593.

Bibcode : 2014ChSCh...7.1579I .

doi : 10.1002/cssc.201300898 .

PMID 24811748 .

^ Lazarevic, David; Aoustin, Emmanuelle; Buclet, Nicolas; Brandt, Nils (December 2010). "Plastic waste management in the context of a European recycling society: Comparing results and uncertainties in a life cycle perspective".

Resources, Conservation and Recycling .

55 (2): 246– 259.

Bibcode : 2010RCR....55..246L .

doi : 10.1016/j.resconrec.2010.09.014 .

^ Hopewell, Jefferson; Dvorak, Robert; Kosior, Edward (July 27, 2009).

"Plastics recycling: challenges and opportunities" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

364 (1526): 2115– 2126.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2008.0311 .

PMC 2873020 .

PMID 19528059 .

^ Lange, Jean-Paul (November 12, 2021).

"Managing Plastic Waste─Sorting, Recycling, Disposal, and Product Redesign" .

ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering .

9 (47): 15722– 15738.

doi : 10.1021/acssuschemeng.1c05013 .

^ Rudolph, Natalie S.; Kiesel, Raphael; Aumanate, Chuanchom (2021).

Understanding Plastics Recycling:Economic, Ecological, and Technical Aspects of Plastic Waste Handling (2nd ed.). Munich: Hanser.

doi : 10.1016/C2020-0-01631-2 (inactive July 1, 2025).

ISBN 978-1-56990-846-4 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ a b Geyer, Roland; Jambeck, Jenna R.

; Law, Kara Lavender (July 2017).

"Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made" .

Science Advances .

3 (7): e1700782.

Bibcode : 2017SciA....3E0782G .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.1700782 .

PMC 5517107 .

PMID 28776036 .

^ Andrady, Anthony L. (February 1994). "Assessment of Environmental Biodegradation of Synthetic Polymers".

Journal of Macromolecular Science, Part C: Polymer Reviews .

34 (1): 25– 76.

doi : 10.1080/15321799408009632 .

^ Ahmed, Temoor; Shahid, Muhammad; Azeem, Farrukh; Rasul, Ijaz; Shah, Asad Ali; Noman, Muhammad; Hameed, Amir; Manzoor, Natasha; Manzoor, Irfan; Muhammad, Sher (March 2018). "Biodegradation of plastics: current scenario and future prospects for environmental safety".

Environmental Science and Pollution Research .

25 (8): 7287– 7298.

Bibcode : 2018ESPR...25.7287A .

doi : 10.1007/s11356-018-1234-9 .

PMID 29332271 .

S2CID 3962436 .

^ Jambeck, Jenna ; et al. (February 13, 2015). "Plastic waste inputs from land into the ocean".

Science .

347 (6223): 768– 771.

Bibcode : 2015Sci...347..768J .

doi : 10.1126/science.1260352 .

PMID 25678662 .

S2CID 206562155 .

^ Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions – A European Strategy for Plastics in a Circular Economy, COM(2018) 28 final, 6 January 2018 ^ Paul, Andrew (May 8, 2023).

"Recycling plants spew a staggering amount of microplastics" .

Popular Science . Retrieved May 8, 2023 .

^ Brown, Erina; MacDonald, Anna; Allen, Steve; Allen, Deonie (May 1, 2023).

"The potential for a plastic recycling facility to release microplastic pollution and possible filtration remediation effectiveness" .

Journal of Hazardous Materials Advances .

10 100309.

Bibcode : 2023JHzMA..1000309B .

doi : 10.1016/j.hazadv.2023.100309 .

ISSN 2772-4166 .

S2CID 258457895 .

^ Zhang, Fan; Zhao, Yuting; Wang, Dandan; Yan, Mengqin; Zhang, Jing; Zhang, Pengyan; Ding, Tonggui; Chen, Lei; Chen, Chao (February 1, 2021).

"Current technologies for plastic waste treatment: A review" .

Journal of Cleaner Production .

282 124523.

Bibcode : 2021JCPro.28224523Z .

doi : 10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.124523 .

ISSN 0959-6526 .

^ Huffman, George L.; Keller, Daniel J. (1973). "The Plastics Issue".

Polymers and Ecological Problems . pp.

155– 167.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4684-0871-3_10 .

ISBN 978-1-4684-0873-7 .

^ Tullo, Alexander (October 10, 2022).

"Amid controversy, industry goes all in on plastics pyrolysis" .

Chemical & Engineering News . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Narayanan S (December 12, 2005).

"The Zadgaonkars turn carry-bags into petrol!" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on November 9, 2012 . Retrieved July 1, 2011 .

^ "Plastic leakage and greenhouse gas emissions are increasing" . OECD . Retrieved August 11, 2022 .

^ "How is plastic made? Climate change is a key ingredient | Friends of the Earth" .

friendsoftheearth.uk . Retrieved February 16, 2024 .

^ a b Meng, Fanran; Brandão, Miguel; Cullen, Jonathan M (February 13, 2024).

"Replacing Plastics with Alternatives Is Worse for Greenhouse Gas Emissions in Most Cases" .

Environmental Science & Technology .

58 (6): 2716– 2727.

Bibcode : 2024EnST...58.2716M .

doi : 10.1021/acs.est.3c05191 .

ISSN 0013-936X .

PMC 10867844 .

PMID 38291786 .

^ De Decker K (June 2009). Grosjean V (ed.).

"The monster footprint of digital technology" . Low-Tech Magazine . Retrieved April 18, 2017 .

^ "How much energy does it take (on average) to produce 1 kilogram of the following materials?" . Low-Tech Magazine. December 26, 2014 . Retrieved April 18, 2017 .

^ Halden RU (2010).

"Plastics and health risks" .

Annual Review of Public Health .

31 (1): 179– 94.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.publhealth.012809.103714 .

PMID 20070188 .

^ Romero, Lina M.; Lyczko, Nathalie; Nzihou, Ange; Antonini, Gérard; Moreau, Eric; Richardeau, Hubert; Coste, Christophe; Madoui, Saïd; Durécu, Sylvain (July 2020).

"New insights on mercury abatement and modeling in a full-scale municipal solid waste incineration flue gas treatment unit" .

Waste Management .

113 : 270– 279.

Bibcode : 2020WaMan.113..270R .

doi : 10.1016/j.wasman.2020.06.003 .

PMID 32559697 .

S2CID 219948357 .

^ Janhäll, Sara; Petersson, Mikaela; Davidsson, Kent; Öman, Tommy; Sommertune, Jens; Kåredal, Monica; Messing, Maria E.; Rissler, Jenny (October 2021).

"Release of carbon nanotubes during combustion of polymer nanocomposites in a pilot-scale facility for waste incineration" .

NanoImpact .

24 100357.

Bibcode : 2021NanoI..2400357J .

doi : 10.1016/j.impact.2021.100357 .

PMID 35559816 .

S2CID 239252029 .

^ Li MX, Yang SS, Ding J, Ding MQ, He L, Xing DF, Criddle CS, Benbow ME, Ren NQ, Wu WM (November 5, 2024).

"Cockroach Blaptica dubia biodegrades polystyrene plastics: Insights for superior ability, microbiome and host genes" .

J Hazard Mater .

479 135756.

Bibcode : 2024JHzM..47935756L .

doi : 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2024.135756 .

PMID 39255668 .

^ UK Patent office (1857).

Patents for inventions . UK Patent office. p. 255.

^ "Dictionary – Definition of celluloid" . Websters-online-dictionary.org. Archived from the original on December 11, 2009 . Retrieved October 26, 2011 .

^ Fenichell S (1996).

Plastic : the making of a synthetic century . New York: HarperBusiness. p.

17 .

ISBN 978-0-88730-732-4 .

^ a b c Trimborn C (August 2004).

"Jewelry Stone Make of Milk" . GZ Art+Design . Retrieved May 17, 2010 .

^ "Historical Overview and Industrial Development" .

International Furan Chemicals, Inc . Retrieved May 4, 2014 .

^ Tratzi, Patrizio; Giuliani, Chiara; Torre, Marco; Tomassetti, Laura; Petrucci, Roberto; Iannoni, Antonio; Torre, Luigi; Genova, Salvatore; Paolini, Valerio; Petracchini, Francesco; Di Carlo, Gabriella (September 1, 2021).

"Effect of Hard Plastic Waste on the Quality of Recycled Polypropylene Blends" .

Recycling .

6 (3): 58.

doi : 10.3390/recycling6030058 .

hdl : 11573/1672407 .

ISSN 2313-4321 .

^ Keith, Matthew; Koller, Martin; Lackner, Maximilian (January 1, 2024).

"Carbon Recycling of High Value Bioplastics: A Route to a Zero-Waste Future" .

Polymers .

16 (12): 1621.

doi : 10.3390/polym16121621 .

ISSN 2073-4360 .

PMC 11207349 .

PMID 38931972 .

^ "Bao bì vinpack" . Retrieved January 6, 2025 .

^ Jensen, Heidi (April 1, 2019).

"Now and Then: A Look Back at 30 Years of Recycling" .

Waste Advantage Magazine . Retrieved January 6, 2025 .

^ Geddie, John; Brock, Joe (March 2, 2022).

" 'Biggest green deal since Paris': UN agrees plastic treaty roadmap" .

Reuters . Retrieved August 3, 2022 .

^ "Historic day in the campaign to beat plastic pollution: Nations commit to develop a legally binding agreement" .

UN Environment . March 2, 2022 . Retrieved August 3, 2022 .

Substantial parts of this text originated from An Introduction to Plastics v1.0 [ usurped ] by Greg Goebel (March 1, 2001), which is in the public domain .

Sources This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under Cc BY-SA 3.0 IGO ( license statement/permission ). Text taken from Drowning in Plastics – Marine Litter and Plastic Waste Vital Graphics​ , United Nations Environment Programme.

Further reading Hopmann, Christian; Greif, Helmut; Wolters, Leo (December 8, 2023).

Training in Plastics Technology . Carl Hanser Verlag GmbH & Company KG.

ISBN 978-1-56990-935-5 .

Fink, Johannes Karl (2024).

Future Trends in Modern Plastics . Wiley.

ISBN 978-1394237579 .

Li, Zibiao; Lim, Jason Y. C.; Wang, Chen-Gang (February 21, 2023).

Circularity of Plastics: Sustainability, Emerging Materials, and Valorization of Waste Plastic . Elsevier.

ISBN 978-0-323-91435-2 .

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Plastics .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Plastic .

"J. Harry Dubois Collection on the History of Plastics, ca. 1900–1975" .

Archives Center, National Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution . Archived from the original on February 12, 2006.

"Material Properties of Plastics – Mechanical, Thermal & Electrical Properties" .

Plastics International . Archived from the original on March 24, 2017.

"Plastics Historical Society" .

"History of plastics, Society of the Plastics Industry" .

plasticsindustry.org . Archived from the original on July 6, 2009.

Knight L (May 17, 2014).

"A brief history of plastics, natural and synthetic" .

BBC Magazine .

"Timeline of important milestone of plastic injection moulding and plastics" .

Tangram Technology Ltd . June 27, 2014.

v t e Plastics Chemical types Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) Cross-linked polyethylene (PEX, XLPE) Ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) Poly(ethyl methacrylate) (PEMA) Polyacrylic acid (PAA) Polyamide (PA) Polybutylene (PB) Polybutylene terephthalate (PBT) Polycarbonate (PC) Polyetheretherketone (PEEK) Polyester (PEs) Polyethylene (PE) Polyethylene terephthalate (PET, PETE) Polyimide (PI) Polylactic acid (PLA) Polyoxymethylene (POM) Polyphenyl ether (PPE) Poly(p-phenylene oxide) (PPO) Polypropylene (PP) Polystyrene (PS) Polysulfone (PES) Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) Polyurethane (PU) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) Polyvinylidene chloride (PVDC) Styrene maleic anhydride (SMA) Styrene-acrylonitrile (SAN) Tritan copolyester Mechanical types Thermoplastic Thermosetting polymer Fibre-reinforced plastic Corrugated plastic Polymeric foam High-performance plastics Additives Polymer additive Colorants Plasticizer Polymer stabilizers Biodegradable additives Filler (materials) Plastics processing Injection moulding Plastic extrusion Blow molding Film blowing Thermoforming Compression molding Calendering Transfer molding Laminating Fiberglass molding Pultrusion Plastic welding Filament winding Solvent bonding Vacuum forming Rotational molding Products Plastics industry segments Commodity plastics Construction Engineering plastics Geosynthetics High-performance plastics Nurdle Category:Plastics applications Plasticulture (Agriculture) Specific goods Blister pack Chairs Packaging film Bottles Bags Cutlery Shopping bags Foam food containers Environment and health v t e Health issues of plastics and polyhalogenated compounds (PHCs) Plasticizers : Phthalates DIBP DBP BBP (BBzP) DIHP DEHP (DOP) DIDP DINP Miscellaneous plasticizers Organophosphates Adipates ( DEHA DOA ) Monomers Bisphenol A (BPA, in Polycarbonates ) Vinyl chloride (in PVC ) Miscellaneous additives incl. PHCs PBDEs PCBs Organotins PFCs Perfluorooctanoic acid Health issues Teratogen Carcinogen Endocrine disruptor Diabetes Obesity Polymer fume fever Pollution Plastic pollution Rubber pollution Great Pacific Garbage Patch Persistent organic pollutant Dioxins List of environmental health hazards Regulations California Proposition 65 European REACH regulation Japan Toxic Substances Law Toxic Substances Control Act Waste Plastic pollution Garbage patch Great Pacific Garbage Patch Persistent organic pollutant Dioxins List of environmental health hazards Plastic recycling Biodegradable plastic Identification codes v t e Labeling Label construction Adhesive Die cutting (web) Hologram In-mould labelling Label Paper Perforation Pressure-sensitive adhesive Plastic Printing Security hologram Release liner Security printing Security label Smart label Sticker Content Advertising Barcode Country of origin Cigarette warning label Ecolabel EU energy label Fair Packaging and Labeling Act List of food labeling regulations Mandatory labelling Nameplate Nutrition facts label Plain tobacco packaging Radio-frequency identification United Kingdom food information regulations UPC Warning label Wine label Use Advertising Authentication Automatic identification and data capture Label dispenser Label printer Packaging Track and trace v t e Rubber Chemical types Latex Natural rubber Synthetic rubber Butyl rubber Chloroprene rubber EPDM rubber Nitrile rubber Silicone rubber Styrene-butadiene Mechanical types Cold rubber Foam rubber Crumb rubber Micronized rubber powder Additives Biodegradable additives Filler (materials) Plasticizer Polymer additive Polymer stabilizers Rubber processing Rubber tapping Rubber technology Vulcanization Industry Bridgestone Dunlop Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company Michelin Rubber Board Rubber industry in Malaysia Rubber Industry Smallholders Development Authority Rubber Manufacturers Association United States Rubber Company List of tire companies Products Rubber band Rubber mulch Rubberized asphalt Tires codes Waste Airfield rubber removal Rubber pollution Dioxins Environmental hazards Great Pacific Garbage Patch Persistent organic pollutant Tire-derived fuel Tire recycling Category Commons v t e Sculpture Types of sculpture Architectural sculpture Assemblage Bas relief Bust Chalk carving Effigy Gas sculpture Earth art Environmental sculpture Figurine Installation art Kinetic sculpture Mobile Monumental Pedimental Soap carving Soft sculpture Statue Stele Styles of sculpture Baroque Classical Detonography Jain sculpture Modern sculpture Relief Renaissance Elements in sculpture Mass Negative space Space Volume Traditional materials Wood Marble Limestone Granite Porphyry Diorite Jade Ivory Clay Terracotta Bronze Gold Silver Butter Soapstone Modern materials Steel Ice Jesmonite Acrylic Concrete Plastic Fiberglass Glass Aluminium Fabric Paper Found object Notable sculptures Venus of Hohle Fels (c. 40–42,000 BP) Lion-man (c. 35–41,000 BP) Venus of Willendorf ( c. 24–26,000 BP) Great Sphinx of Giza (c. 2558–2532 BCE) Nefertiti Bust (c. 1345 BCE) Mask of Tutankhamun (c. 1323 BCE) Abu Simbel temples (c. 1264 BCE) Discobolus (c. 450 BCE) Elgin Marbles from the Parthenon (438 BCE) Colossus of Rhodes (c. 292 BCE) Lion Capital of Ashoka (c. 250 BCE) Terracotta Army (246–210 BCE) Winged Victory of Samothrace (c. 2nd century BCE) Laocoön and His Sons (c. 200 BCE – 70 CE) Venus de Milo (130–100 BCE) Augustus of Prima Porta (c. 1st century CE) Equestrian Statue of Marcus Aurelius (175 CE) Buddhas of Bamiyan (507–554 CE) Great Budda of Nara (752 CE) Borobudur (c. 780-833 CE) Bayon (c. 12th or 13th century CE) Angkor Wat (1150 CE) Chartes Cathedral (c. 1194–1250 CE) Konark Sun Temple (1250 CE) Moai , Easter Islands (1250–1500 CE) Pietà (1498–1499) David (1501–1504) Aztec sun stone (1502–1520) Ecstasy of Saint Teresa (1647–1652) Veiled Christ (1753) Jadeite Cabbage (19th century) Nelson's Column (1843) Lion of Belfort (1880) The Kiss (1882) Liberty Enlightening the World , Statue of Liberty (1886) The Gates of Hell (1890–1917) The Thinker (1904) Abraham Lincoln (1920) Mount Rushmore Shrine of Democracy (1927–1941) Christ the Redeemer (1927–1931) The Motherland Calls (1967) Fallen Astronaut (1971) Mother Ukraine (1981) Genghis Khan Equestrian Statue (2008) Statue of Unity (2018) Category Outline v t e Human impact on the environment General Anthropocene Ecological footprint Environmental impact assessment Environmental issues list of issues Human impact on marine life List of global issues Impact assessment Planetary boundaries Social ecology (ethics) Causes Causes of climate change Agriculture animal agriculture cannabis cultivation irrigation meat production cocoa production palm oil (US) Bitcoin Corporate behavior Deforestation and climate change Energy industry biofuels biodiesel coal electricity energy fashion fracking (US) nuclear power oil shale petroleum reservoirs transport Genetic pollution Environmental crime Explosives Industrialisation Land use Manufacturing cleaning agents concrete fashion plastics nanotechnology paint paper pesticides pharmaceuticals and personal care Marine life fishing fishing down the food web marine pollution overfishing Mining Overconsumption Overdrafting Overexploitation Overgrazing Particulates Pollution Quarrying Reservoirs Tourism Transport aviation rail roads shipping Urbanization urban sprawl War Effects Biodiversity threats biodiversity loss decline in amphibian populations decline in insect populations Climate change runaway climate change in the United States Deforestation Defaunation Desertification Ecocide Ecological crisis Effects of climate change Effects of climate change on agriculture Multiple breadbasket failure Effects of climate change on livestock Environmental insecurity Environmental issues in the United States Coral reefs Externality Forest dieback Environmental degradation Erosion Freshwater cycle Greenhouse gas emissions Habitat destruction Holocene extinction Nitrogen cycle Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Loss and damage Loss of green belts Phosphorus cycle Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Technofossilization Tropical cyclones and climate change Water degradation Water pollution Water scarcity Mitigation Alternative fuel vehicle propulsion Birth control Cleaner production Climate change mitigation Community resilience Cultured meat Decoupling Ecological engineering Environmental engineering Environmental mitigation Industrial ecology Mitigation banking Organic farming Recycling Reforestation urban Restoration ecology Sustainability Sustainable consumption Waste minimization Commons Category by country assessment mitigation v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool / Equipment Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Stonemasonry Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Seaplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear Power Weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterials Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Cosmetics Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Particle accelerator Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Outline Portal v t e Health issues of plastics and polyhalogenated compounds (PHCs) Plasticizers : Phthalates DIBP DBP BBP (BBzP) DIHP DEHP (DOP) DIDP DINP Miscellaneous plasticizers Organophosphates Adipates ( DEHA DOA ) Monomers Bisphenol A (BPA, in Polycarbonates ) Vinyl chloride (in PVC ) Miscellaneous additives incl. PHCs PBDEs PCBs Organotins PFCs Perfluorooctanoic acid Health issues Teratogen Carcinogen Endocrine disruptor Diabetes Obesity Polymer fume fever Pollution Plastic pollution Rubber pollution Great Pacific Garbage Patch Persistent organic pollutant Dioxins List of environmental health hazards Regulations California Proposition 65 European REACH regulation Japan Toxic Substances Law Toxic Substances Control Act Authority control databases : National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐j4pgd
Cached time: 20250814215742
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.575 seconds
Real time usage: 3.051 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 16099/1000000
Revision size: 103792/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 581948/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12729/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 33/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 653967/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.555/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18584707/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2536.112      1 -total
 39.60% 1004.260      1 Template:Reflist
 15.72%  398.594     58 Template:Cite_journal
 11.10%  281.459     56 Template:Cite_web
  9.35%  237.044      2 Template:Excerpt
  7.22%  183.129     17 Template:Cite_book
  6.98%  176.930      4 Template:Graph:Chart
  6.34%  160.887     11 Template:Navbox
  6.28%  159.376     17 Template:Annotated_link
  4.00%  101.534      4 Template:Lang Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:26145195:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215742 and revision id 1300117300. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Plastic&oldid=1300117300 " Categories : Plastics Dielectrics Hidden categories: Pages using the Graph extension Pages with disabled graphs CS1 uses Ancient Greek-language script (grc) Source attribution CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use American English from March 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from September 2023 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2021 All articles containing potentially dated statements Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2025 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from February 2021 Articles with excerpts Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Pages displaying short descriptions with no spaces via Module:Annotated link Free-content attribution Free content from United Nations Environment Programme Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 10:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Plastic 142 languages Add topic

