Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Authorship 2 Overview 3 Illuminations 4 Copies of Aurora consurgens Toggle Copies of Aurora consurgens subsection 4.1 Major differences 5 Impact 6 Gallery 7 Notes 8 References Toggle the table of contents Aurora consurgens 9 languages Català Čeština Deutsch Español Français Italiano Latina Português Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 15th century alchemical treatise For the Angra album, see Aurora Consurgens (album) .

Illustration of an angel found in Aurora consurgens The Aurora consurgens is an alchemical treatise of the 15th century famous for the rich illuminations that accompany it in some manuscripts.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] : §38–44 While in the last century, the text has been more commonly referred to as "Pseudo-Aquinas", there are as well arguments in favour of Thomas Aquinas , [ 2 ] : §591f., §616 to whom it has originally been attributed in some manuscripts. The translated title from Latin into English is "Rising dawn." Authorship [ edit ] The argument against the authorship of Thomas Aquinas is that the style of Aurora consurgens does not correspond to that of Thomas Aquinas (except in the Fourth Parable, which in style and content is similar to the "Expositio" in "Symbolum Apostolorum", which is an oral lecture of Thomas of Aquinas).

[ 3 ] According to von Franz the following arguments support the hypothesis of Thomas Aquinas being the author of Aurora Consurgens : Its author knows both the Bible and liturgy intimately, he quotes rather little of classical alchemical texts and mentions neither chemical recipes nor technical instructions, which indicates a clergyman to be its author. His praising of the poor is typical for a Dominican or a Franciscan. The passionate style of being gripped could result from an intrusion of the unconscious, which – as psychological experience tells - might have compensated a rather intellectual consciousness dominated by logic. The biography of Thomas Aquinas fits this, as, before his death, Thomas Aquinas is said to have had a disturbing vision, the content of which is not authenticated. But he is said to have interpreted the Song of Songs on his deathbed. Thus, this treatise might well represent his last seminar or his last words.

[ 2 ] : §590–616 Overview [ edit ] Aurora consurgens is a commentary on the Latin translation of Silvery Waters by Senior Zadith (Ibn Umayl) . It also refers to the Song of Songs , especially in its last (7th) parable (de confabulatione dilecti cum dilecta), which draws closely on it, in main parts paraphrasing it.

[ 2 ] : §490, §590 Unusual for a work of this type, the text is accompanied by about thirty-seven fine miniatures in watercolour. The illustrations are representations of alchemical symbols depicted in human or animal form. For example, mercury is depicted as a serpent, gold as the sun and silver as the moon.

[ 4 ] These illustrations incorporate some of the earliest Greek alchemical symbols known, found in the Authentic Memoirs of Zosimos of Panopolis .

Illuminations [ edit ] The visuals found in Aurora consurgens are regarded by B. Obrist as alchemical metaphors that relate to human and animal procreation, procedures like calcination and putrefaction and other motifs.

[ 4 ] The manuscript also contains pictorial metaphors combined with glass vessels which depict the stages of the alchemical art of transformation. There are other metaphors found throughout the manuscript that are used in conjunction to create chains of metaphors. Some examples of this include cosmological and philosophical principles of the concepts like "two are one" and "nature vanquishes nature".

[ 4 ] Another illustration combines the motifs of Mercury decapitating the sun and the moon with a vase filled with silver and gold flowers.

[ 4 ] Depiction of the Ouroboros found in Aurora consurgens Another depicts two birds holding each other in a way that forms a circle which also symbolizes "two in one". This exemplifies the cosmic principle of unity, shown metaphorically as the dragon biting its tail. The ouroboros biting its tail has been stylized into a medallion of three concentric circles with inscriptions referring to the unity of everything and two natures attracting and dominating each other. It is associated with the symbols of the sun, moon, mercury, and sulfur.

[ 4 ] Another example includes the eagle and the dragon, which represent mercury as a volatile and as a solidified substance, respectively.

[ 4 ] Further, the unification of the opposite principles female/male, passive/active, cold/hot, moist/dry finds expression in the coupling of the sun and the moon, a cosmological motif of central importance since it symbolizes the generation of all things.

[ 4 ] Sage with a tablet within a church-like building (1420/30), the "house of wisdom", depicted in Aurora Consurgens (Codex Rhenoviensis 172, Rheinau, fol. 7r).

Illustration from a transcript (608H/1211) of Muḥammad ibn Umayl al-Tamimi's book Al-mā' al-waraqī (The Silvery Water), also called Senioris Zadith tabula chymica , depicting his Great Vision.

There are many common features between the illustration of Aurora Consurgens (Cod. Rhenov. fol. 7r) and that of Muḥammad Ibn Umails The Silvery Water . As Th. Abt suggests, the depiction of aurora is very likely to be an assimilated transmission of the depiction of Ibn Umails great alchemical vision in his Arabic The Silvery Water . Ibn Umail understood the symbolic pictograms on the tablet to represent the quintessence of alchemical knowledge. Both illustrations show a wise old man, sitting within a sanctuary, which has two rooms, and holding a tablet with symbolic pictograms. As well, three people pointing towards his direction and nine birds carrying weapons are depicted. Whereas the Arabic original shows a clearer distinction of two similar sized rooms, meant to represent an Egyptian temple, the Latin one shows a kind of church with two rooms of different size. Further, the Arabic original gives different coloured birds carrying swords instead of blue birds with bows, a woman in a window instead of a glass bottle on top of a pole, etc. This illustration may have inspired a rather similar depiction in Theatrum Chemicum (Basle, 1660) and in J.J. Mangets Bibliotheca Chemica (Geneva, 1702).

[ 5 ] Copies of Aurora consurgens [ edit ] Zürich, Zentralbibliothek MS. Rhenoviensis 172 Glasgow, University Library MS. Ferguson 6 Leiden, Universiteitsbibliotheek, MS. Vossiani Chymici F. 29 Paris, Bibliothèque nationale de France, MS. Parisinus Latinus 14006 Prague, Univerzitní knihovna, MS. VI. Fd. 26 Prague, Metropolitan Chapter, MS. 1663. O. LXXIX Berlin, Staatsbibliothek Preußischer Kulturbesitz, MS. Germ. qu. 848 Major differences [ edit ] In Glasgow, Sp. Coll. Ferguson MS 6 (f. 220v), a couple depicted performing intercourse are hidden under a sheet and a blue bedspread. Their child is shown sleeping in a small rocking cradle, along with a young servant boy standing at the foot of the bed.

[ 6 ] At the Staatsbibliothek in Berlin MS Ger. Quatro. 848 (f. 30v), the related illustration has been defaced by being covered with a brown wash even though they appear to be covered to their waists by bed clothes. The child and young servant boy at the end of the bed were not damaged. This implies that the defacer was likely offended by the sexual nature of the scene.

[ 6 ] Another illustration in the Berlin manuscript (f. 18r), in which the couple makes love on a bed in a forest surrounded by a wattle fence, has also been defaced with wash, although not to the same degree as the image of the couple in bed. (f. 30v).

[ 6 ] These defacements suggest that some readers of alchemical texts were offended by visualizations of sexual analogies.

[ 6 ] Depiction of the zodiac menstrual cycle found in Aurora consurgens The explicitness of sexual details also varies from text to text.

In an illustration from Zürich Zentralbibliothek MS Rh. 172 (f. 11r), a menstruating woman bleeds profusely within a zodiac circle to illustrate her monthly cycle and the creation of menstruation and its use within the body.

[ 6 ] In the Spruch der Philosophien, Glasgow's Sp. Coll. Ferguson MS 6 (Pl. 3), the artist concealed her genitals under her skirt and reduced the blood flow, which obscures the meaning of the menstrual cloths she is holding up.

[ 6 ] Impact [ edit ] The representation of sexuality within these images also provides many points of comparison. The lovemaking of King and Queen in the Rosarium philosophorum series is derived from scenes in the Aurora consurgens and the Donum Dei series.

[ 6 ] Many patrons were interested in aesthetic and poetic contemplation and also in gaining the knowledge to perform alchemy.

Aurora consurgens addresses all of the factors, implying it is directed to aristocratic and noble patrons. Some of these patrons include the margrave of Brandenburg and Barbara of Cilli , the wife of the emperor Sigismund .

[ citation needed ] Gallery [ edit ] Senior Zadith carries the Key that opens The Treasure House of Wisdom.

A statue of an ancient sage holds the tablet of wisdom in a temple as described in The Silvery Water Chimera in athanor Conjoined opposites Breastfeeding of opposites Music of death Sun and moon jousting Notes [ edit ] ^ The Ms Vossianus Chemicus Nr. 29, Leyden and Ms Rhenoviensis 172 are rich in illuminations.

^ a b c d Marie-Louise von Franz, Aurora Consurgens. A Document Attributed to Thomas Aquinas on the Problem of Opposites in Alchemy . First published 1966. Inner City Books, Toronto, 2000.

ISBN 0-919123-90-2 .

^ E. v. Lippmann, Geschichte der Alchemie Vol. II. Springer, Berlin 1931, p. 28. Quoted by Marie-Louise von Franz in her book Aurora consurgens , discussing the authorship (§592).

^ a b c d e f g Obrist, Barbara.

"Visualization in Medieval Alchemy" .

International Journal for Philosophy of Chemistry .

^ Theodor Abt, "Ibn Umail's great Vision as Key to the Ḥall ar-Rumūz" and "The Transmission of Ibn Umail's Vision to the Occident", both chapters in: Book of the Explanation of the Symbols. Kitāb Ḥall ar-Rumūz by Muḥammad ibn Umail. Psychological Commentary by Theodor Abt.

Corpus Alchemicum Arabicum  (CALA) IB, Living Human Heritage Zurich 2009, ISBN 3952260886 , p. 15-20, 59-64.

^ a b c d e f g Warlick, M. E. (2006). "Fluctuating Identities: Gender Reversals in Alchemic Imagery". In Wamberg, Jacob (ed.).

Art & Alchemy . Museum Tusculanum Press, 2006. p. 114.

ISBN 9788763502672 . Retrieved 4 June 2014 .

References [ edit ] Aquinas, St Thomas.

Aurora consurgens. A Document Attributed to Thomas Aquinas on the Problem of Opposites in Alchemy . Edited, introduced and commented on by Marie-Louise von Franz . First published 1966. Inner City Books, Toronto 2000.

ISBN 0-919123-90-2 .

Aurora consurgens .

Translated with an Introduction by Paul Ferguson. Magnum Opus Hermetic Sourceworks No. 40. Glasgow, 2011.

Christian, William (2022), Unio Mystica and the Aurora Consurgens : Mystical Theology in a Late Medieval Alchemical Treatise , Department of History  Durham University.

Warlick, M. E. (2006).

"Fluctuating Identities: Gender Reversals in Alchemical Imagery" . In Wamberg, Jacob (ed.).

Art & Alchemy . Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press. pp.

103– 128.

ISBN 87-635-0267-4 . Retrieved 3 May 2016 .

v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aurora_consurgens&oldid=1273945753 " Categories : 15th-century books in Latin Scientific illuminated manuscripts Alchemical documents Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2015 This page was last edited on 4 February 2025, at 18:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aurora consurgens 9 languages Add topic

