Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ancient social criticism 2 Social criticism during the Enlightenment 3 Academic forms 4 In literature Toggle In literature subsection 4.1 Classical writings 4.2 Important contemporary works 5 In music 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Social criticism 25 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Lëtzebuergesch Nederlands नेपाली Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Română Slovenščina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of interpreting and sorting issues in contemporary society This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Social criticism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Social criticism is a form of academic or journalistic criticism focusing on social issues in contemporary society , in respect to perceived injustices and power relations in general.

Ancient social criticism [ edit ] Five fragments of text produced by the ancient Greek philosopher Xenophanes (c.570-c.478 BC) cover aspects of social criticism, including comments on the adulation directed to leading sport players and advice on living a life of moderation. These fragments have been seen as anticipating some of the later writings of Plato in his Republic .

[ 1 ] Social criticism during the Enlightenment [ edit ] The origins of modern social criticism date back at least to the Age of Enlightenment . According to the historian Jonathan Israel the roots of the radical enlightenment can be found in Spinoza and his circle.

[ 2 ] Radical enlighteners like Jean Meslier were not satisfied with the social criticism of the time, which was essentially a criticism of religion. The focus of his criticism was the suffering of the peasants. In addition, there was also a criticism of civilization for religious reasons, such as that which emanated from the Quakers in England.

Jean-Jacques Rousseau developed a social criticism in his political philosophy which influenced the French Revolution and in his pedagogy.

Academic forms [ edit ] The positivism dispute between critical rationalism and the Frankfurt School , [ 3 ] dealt with the question of whether research in the social sciences should be "neutral" or consciously adopt a partisan view. Academic works of social criticism can belong to social philosophy , political economy , sociology , social psychology , psychoanalysis but also cultural studies and other disciplines or reject academic forms of discourse .

[ 4 ] In literature [ edit ] See also: Literary criticism Social criticism can be expressed in a fictional form, e.g. in a revolutionary novel like The Iron Heel (1908) by Jack London , in dystopian novels like Aldous Huxley 's Brave New World (1932), George Orwell 's Nineteen Eighty-Four (1949), Ray Bradbury 's Fahrenheit 451 (1953), and Rafael Grugman 's Nontraditional Love (2008), or in children's books or films. According to Frederick Douglass , "Where justice is denied, where poverty is enforced, where ignorance prevails, and where any one class is made to feel that society is an organized conspiracy to oppress, rob and degrade them, neither persons nor property will be safe." [ 5 ] Fictional literature can have a significant social impact. For example, the 1852 novel Uncle Tom's Cabin , by Harriet Beecher Stowe furthered the anti-slavery movement in the United States, and the 1885 novel Ramona , by Helen Hunt Jackson , brought about changes in laws regarding Native Americans . Similarly, Upton Sinclair 's 1906 novel The Jungle helped create new laws related to public health and food handling, and Arthur Morrison 's 1896 novel A Child of the Jago caused England to change its housing laws.

[ citation needed ] Charles Dickens and Orwell respectively wrote A Tale of Two Cities and Animal Farm to express their disillusionment with society and human nature.

A Tale of Two Cities typifies this kind of literature. Besides the central theme of love is another prevalent theme, that of a revolution gone bad. Dickens shows that human nature causes humans to be vengeful and at time overly ambitious. Both of these books are similar in that both describe how, even with the best of intentions, human ambitions get the best of them.

Animal Farm , written in 1944, is a book that tells the animal fable of a farm in which the farm animals revolt against their human masters. It is an example of social criticism in literature in which Orwell satirized the events in Russia after the Bolshevik Revolution . He anthropomorphizes the animals, and alludes each one to a counterpart in Russian history . Both authors also demonstrate that violence and the Machiavellian attitude of "the ends justifying the means" are deplorable. They also express their authors' disenchantment with the state of evolution of human nature.

[ citation needed ] Dickens and Orwell imply, that even if humans begin with honourable intentions, there will be some who will let their basic instincts take control. In A Tale of Two Cities , Dickens examines the inner soul, and shares with us how people are driven to the valley of human emotions, where desperation and anger reign, and what could happen afterwards if we let these emotions build up inside. Every human being is capable of becoming a ruthless, opportunistic being like Napoleon or Madame Defarge , if placed in the right place, at the right time.

Animal Farm portrays this nature through parodying events in real history. Given the right conditions, these events could happen anywhere, for example a leader becoming overly ambitious to the point of harming his people for more power.

Satirical fables are also creatively used as a criticism strategy to expose the inaction and the superficial,  performative efforts of governments and corporations in mitigating climate change and addressing environmental problems. For instance, Vuong Quan Hoang wrote in Wild Wise Weird , "*Grand conclusion: The report is still completely honest, trustworthy, and ethical,  even though the data are fabricated,  and measurements are falsified.   The methane emission reduction campaign has achieved phenomenal success. Therefore, the bird village approves the inclusion of the report in Kingfisher’s lifetime achievement archive." [ 6 ] Classical writings [ edit ] Étienne de La Boétie : Discourse on Voluntary Servitude (circa 1560) Baruch de Spinoza : Tractatus Theologico-Politicus , 1670 Immanuel Kant : What Is Enlightenment?

1784 Mary Wollstonecraft : A Vindication of the Rights of Woman 1792 Karl Marx : Das Kapital .

1867 Mikhail Bakunin : Statism and Anarchy 1873 Friedrich Nietzsche : Untimely Meditations .

(1873–1876) Upton Sinclair : The Jungle . 1906 Walter Benjamin : Zur Kritik der Gewalt . In: Archiv für Sozialwissenschaften und Sozialpolitik , 1921, engl. Toward the Critique of Violence: A Critical Edition, Stanford University Press 2021 Georg Lukács : History and Class Consciousness . 1923 Virginia Woolf : A Room of One's Own . 1929 Sigmund Freud : Civilization and Its Discontents . 1930 Max Horkheimer : Traditional and Critical Theory (1937) Norbert Elias : Über den Prozeß der Zivilisation . 1939, engl The Civilizing Process Friedrich August von Hayek : The Road to Serfdom . 1944 Max Horkheimer , Theodor W. Adorno : Dialektik der Aufklärung . 1947, engl.

Dialectic of Enlightenment Simone de Beauvoir : Le Deuxième Sexe , 1949, engl.

The Second Sex .

Aimé Césaire : Discours sur le colonialisme (1950), engl.

Discourse on Colonialism Ernst Bloch : Das Prinzip Hoffnung (1938 bis 1947), engl.

The Principle of Hope Erich Fromm : The art of loving . 1956 Milovan Đilas : The New Class: An Analysis of the Communist System 1957 Friedrich August von Hayek : The Constitution of Liberty . 1960 Frantz Fanon : Les damnés de la terre , engl.

The Wretched of the Earth Rachel Carson : Silent Spring (1962) Herbert Marcuse : One-Dimensional Man (1964) Guy Debord : La Société du spectacle (1967), engl.

The Society of the Spectacle Louis Althusser : Idéologie et appareils idéologiques d’État , published in La Pensée, no 151, June 1970, engl.

Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Michel Foucault : Surveiller et punir: Naissance de la prison (1975), engl.

Discipline and Punish Michel Foucault : La volonté de savoir , engl. vol. 1 of The History of Sexuality Cornelius Castoriadis : L'Institution imaginaire de la société (1975), engl.

Imaginary Institution of Society: Creativity and Autonomy in the Social–historical World , London: Polity, 1997 (new edition) Pierre Bourdieu : La distinction: Critique sociale du jugement (1979), engl.

Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste Important contemporary works [ edit ] Audre Lorde : Sister Outsider , 1984 Michel Henry : La barbarie . Bernard Grasset, Paris 1987,engl.

Barbarism , Continuum 2012 Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak : Can the Subaltern Speak?

in: Cary Nelson & Lawrence Grossberg (Hgg.): Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture, University of Illinois Press, Chicago 1988, Judith Butler : Gender Trouble . 1989 Monique Wittig : The Straight Mind and other Essays , 1992 Raewyn Connell : Masculinities . 1995 Richard Sennett : The corrosion of character. The Personal Consequences Of Work In the New Capitalism . 1998 Noam Chomsky : Manufacturing Consent . 1988.

Profit over People . 2000 Gilbert Rist : Le développement, Histoire d’une croyance occidentale . Presses de Sciences Po, Paris 1996 – engl.

The History of Development: From Western Origins to Global Faith . Zed Books, London 2003 Arno Gruen : The Insanity of Normality: Understanding Human Destructiveness . Human Development Books, Berkeley 2007 In music [ edit ] Social criticism is present in opera (e.g.

The Cradle Will Rock or Trouble in Tahiti ) and other types of classical music , such as the Symphony No.13 , called " Babi Yar ", of Dmitri Shostakovich .

Musical expressions of social criticism are also found in rock and rap music, with examples that include " God Save the Queen " by the Sex Pistols [ 7 ] and " Brenda's Got a Baby " by 2Pac .

See also [ edit ] Cancel culture Critical Legal Studies Critical Race Theory Critique of political economy Cultural critic Feminism Marxism Postcolonialism Social theory References [ edit ] ^ Lesher, James (Summer 2023).

"Xenophanes" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Jonathan Israel, Radical Enlightenment: Philosophy and the Making of Modernity 1650-1750 , Oxford University Press 2002 ^ D'Amico, Robert (21 December 1990).

"Karl Popper and the Frankfurt School" .

Telos .

1990 (86): 33– 48.

doi : 10.3817/1290086033 .

ISSN 0090-6514 .

S2CID 147263662 .

^ "Types of Literary Criticism" .

^ From Douglass's speech in 1886 on the 24th anniversary of emancipation , Washington, D.C.

^ Vuong, Quan-Hoang (2024).

Wild Wise Weird . AISDL.

ISBN 979-8353946595 .

^ Mark Savage (2022-05-03).

"Sex Pistols to re-release God Save the Queen ahead of Jubilee" .

BBC . Retrieved 2025-04-17 .

v t e Criticism The arts Literary criticism Art criticism Film criticism Theatre criticism Human behavior Self-criticism Social systems Social criticism Advertising Capitalism Conservative Judaism Democracy Fascism Intellectual property Copyright Patents Atheism and religion Atheism Religion Buddhism Christianity Catholic Church Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Jehovah's Witnesses Jesus Protestantism Hinduism Islam Muhammad Quran Jainism Judaism Modern paganism Monotheism Pandeism Zoroastrianism Corporations Airbnb Amazon AT&T Chevron Coca-Cola Comcast Electronic Arts Facebook Google Huawei IKEA Microsoft McDonalds Netflix Paramount Global Starbucks Tesla, Inc.

Twitter Walmart Walt Disney Company Yahoo!

Mass media BBC CNBC ESPN Fox News MSNBC Washington Post Wikipedia Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics Criticism of science Criticism of technology Software C++ Desktop Linux Java Windows 10 Nations and governments Criticism of Israel United States foreign policy United States government Wars and conflicts Crusading Iraq War Opposition to the Iraq War Opposition to the War in Afghanistan (2001–2021) Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War Opposition to World War I Opposition to World War II War on terror Others and similar concepts Anti-scientific viewpoints Appraisal (discourse analysis) Critique Critique of work Evaluation Review v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Social_criticism&oldid=1303596303 " Categories : Criticisms Cultural studies Justice Social commentary Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from February 2025 All articles that may contain original research Wikipedia articles with style issues from February 2025 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 22:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Social criticism 25 languages Add topic

