Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mathematics 2 National Socialism 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Erhard Schmidt 25 languages العربية تۆرکجه Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Kreyòl ayisyen Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Baltic German mathematician For the World War I Imperial German Admiral, see Erhard Schmidt (admiral) .

Erhard Schmidt Erhard Schmidt (courtesy MFO) Born ( 1876-01-13 ) 13 January 1876 Tartu , Governorate of Livonia (now Estonia ) Died 6 December 1959 (1959-12-06) (aged 83) Berlin Alma mater University of Göttingen Known for Schmidt decomposition Gram–Schmidt process Hilbert–Schmidt operator Hilbert–Schmidt integral operator Singular value Scientific career Fields Mathematics Thesis Entwickelung willkürlicher Functionen nach Systemen vorgeschriebener (1905) Doctoral advisor David Hilbert [ 1 ] Doctoral students Salomon Bochner Alfred Brauer Richard Brauer Lothar Collatz Alexander Dinghas Michael Golomb Guido Hoheisel Eberhard Hopf Heinz Hopf Martin Kneser Wilhelm Specht Erhard Schmidt (13 January 1876 – 6 December 1959) was a Baltic German mathematician whose work significantly influenced the direction of mathematics in the twentieth century.

[ 2 ] Schmidt was born in Tartu (German: Dorpat ), in the Governorate of Livonia (now Estonia ).

Mathematics [ edit ] His advisor was David Hilbert [ 1 ] and he was awarded his doctorate from University of Göttingen in 1905. His doctoral dissertation was entitled Entwickelung willkürlicher Funktionen nach Systemen vorgeschriebener and was a work on integral equations .

[ 1 ] Together with David Hilbert he made important contributions to functional analysis .

Ernst Zermelo credited conversations with Schmidt for the idea and method for his classic 1904 proof of the Well-ordering theorem from an " Axiom of choice ", which has become an integral part of modern set theory .

[ 3 ] After the war, in 1948, Schmidt founded and became the first editor-in-chief of the journal Mathematische Nachrichten .

[ 2 ] National Socialism [ edit ] During World War II Schmidt held positions of authority at the University of Berlin and had to carry out various Nazi resolutions against the Jews—a job that he apparently did not do well, since he was criticized at one point for not understanding the " Jewish question ". At the celebration of Schmidt's 75th birthday in 1951 a prominent Jewish mathematician, Hans Freudenthal , who had survived the Nazi years, spoke of the difficulties that Schmidt faced during that period without criticism.

[ 2 ] Schmidt was, however, a conservative and a nationalist, and defended Hitler after Kristallnacht , telling Issai Schur that "Suppose we had to fight a war to rearm Germany, unite with Austria, liberate the Saar and the German part of Czechoslovakia. Such a war would have cost us half a million young men. But everybody would have admired our victorious leader. Now, Hitler has sacrificed half a million Jews and has achieved great things for Germany. I hope some day you will be recompensed but I am still grateful to Hitler".

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Chebyshev function Isoperimetric inequality Low-rank approximation List of Baltic German scientists Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Erhard Schmidt at the Mathematics Genealogy Project ^ a b c O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Erhard Schmidt" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews ^ Zermelo 1904 , pp. 514, 516.

^ Sanford L. Segal , Mathematicians Under the Nazis , Princeton University Press 2003, Page 358.

References [ edit ] Zermelo, Ernst (1904).

"Beweis, daß jede Menge wohlgeordnet werden kann" .

Mathematische Annalen (in German).

59 (4): 514– 516.

doi : 10.1007/BF01445300 .

S2CID 124189935 . Archived from the original on 5 March 2016 . Retrieved 3 January 2016 .

Reprinted in English translation as "Proof that every set can be well-ordered", van Heijenoort 1976, pp. 139–141.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Vatican Israel Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Erhard_Schmidt&oldid=1275908296 " Categories : 1876 births 1959 deaths Scientists from Tartu People from Kreis Dorpat People of Baltic German descent 19th-century German mathematicians 20th-century German mathematicians Linear algebraists Academic journal editors University of Tartu alumni Emigrants from the Russian Empire to Germany Recipients of the National Prize of East Germany Presidents of the German Mathematical Society Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 Articles with hCards Articles containing German-language text CS1 German-language sources (de) This page was last edited on 15 February 2025, at 20:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Erhard Schmidt 25 languages Add topic

