Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Candidature and leadership challenge 3 As an MSP 4 Joining the Scottish Greens 5 Recent activity 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Bill Wilson (Scottish politician) 2 languages العربية Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scottish politician This article's factual accuracy may be compromised due to out-of-date information . The reason given is: Wilson is no longer co-convenor of the Edinburgh Greens.

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( June 2020 ) Bill Wilson Member of the Scottish Parliament for West of Scotland (1 of 7 Regional MSPs) In office 3 May 2007 – 22 March 2011 Personal details Born ( 1963-12-11 ) 11 December 1963 (age 61) Paisley , Scotland Political party Scottish Green Party (since 2017) Other political affiliations Scottish National Party (1989–2017) Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e Dr William Laurence Wilson (born 11 December 1963) is a former Scottish National Party (SNP) politician. He was a regional list Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) for the West of Scotland region from 2007 to 2011. He left the SNP in 2017 and now serves as co-convener of the Edinburgh Branch of the Scottish Green Party .

Early life [ edit ] Wilson was born in Paisley in 1963 and attended Shawlands Academy , the University of Glasgow , University of Aberdeen , and Queen's University Belfast .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] While living in Oxford , employed in conservation by the Berkshire, Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire Wildlife Trust and the University of Oxford , he became politically involved with the Labour Party . Upon returning to his native Scotland he became convinced of the case for Scottish independence and that the Labour Party's commitment to social justice was waning. In 1989 he joined the Scottish National Party (SNP).

[ 1 ] Candidature and leadership challenge [ edit ] He stood unsuccessfully as an SNP candidate for the House of Commons in the Glasgow Anniesland constituency in the 1997 General Election before standing in the Glasgow Maryhill constituency in both the 1999 and 2003 Scottish Parliamentary elections. Wilson was also elected chair of the SNP's Glasgow Regional Association in 2001.

In the aftermath of the SNP's poor election performance in 2003, Wilson became convinced that a change of direction was needed by the SNP leadership. After discussing this with various SNP members, he was persuaded to contest the leadership himself and launched a challenge against the SNP leader, John Swinney .

[ 1 ] His campaign focused on the issue of centralising the control of the party away from the branches and activists, and what he argued was the trend of placing the SNP ideologically in the centre ground of politics, away from the party's traditional position on the left-of-centre.

In the leadership contest that ensued at the SNP's 2003 Conference Swinney received 577 votes from those delegates voting to Wilson's 111 to remain leader. There were 17 "positive abstentions" (delegates present who voted in other ballots that day) and 60 non-voters. However, the following year Swinney resigned after sustained media speculation that he was unsuitable for the role. The immediate catalyst for Swinney's resignation was the SNP's poor performance in the elections to the European Parliament , although many spectators commented that Wilson's challenge also contributed to his resignation.

Shortly after the leadership contest he stood down as convenor of the SNP Glasgow Regional Association and was replaced in that position by his leadership campaign manager. Wilson stood as the SNP candidate for the Paisley and Renfrewshire North constituency for the 2005 UK general election . He finished in second place behind James Sheridan of the Labour Party .

As an MSP [ edit ] At the 2007 Scottish Parliament election , Wilson stood in the West Renfrewshire constituency and also on the party list for the West of Scotland region. In West Renfrewshire he came third, the SNP dropping behind the Conservatives who took second place to Labour. He was elected on the regional list and sworn in as a Member of the Scottish Parliament.

Wilson's maiden speech to the Scottish Parliament, delivered on 6 June 2007, underlined his belief in the links between crime and deprivation and his commitment to social justice.

[ 3 ] His campaigns have included awareness of the negative health impact of depleted uranium on service personnel and civilians, equity fines for corporate crimes, as well as promotion of Scots language .

Joining the Scottish Greens [ edit ] Following the 2017 General Election campaign Wilson left the SNP and subsequently joined the Scottish Green Party . On 28 June 2018 he was elected Co-Convener of the Edinburgh Branch of the Scottish Greens, standing down in 2019. In the 2021 Scottish Parliament election he stood on the Lothian List for the Scottish Green Party as the 10th of 12 candidates.

[ 4 ] The party won two seats in the region.

Recent activity [ edit ] After standing as a candidate for the Scottish Green Party in the 2021 Scottish Parliament election , Bill Wilson has remained active in party affairs but has not held national office. As of July 2025, he has not stood for or been elected to a leadership position in the party's ongoing leadership contest.

[ 5 ] As of July 2025, he has not stood for or been elected to a leadership position in the party's ongoing leadership contest.

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c MacLeod, Murdo (27 July 2003).

"Asking a leading question" .

Scotland on Sunday . Retrieved 10 April 2018 .

^ "Bill Wilson MSP - About Bill (Former MSP)" . Archived from the original on 8 July 2011 . Retrieved 6 June 2011 .

^ "MSPs: Previous MSPs: Wilson, Bil" . Scottish Parliament . Retrieved 10 May 2016 .

^ "Holyrood 2021 Candidates" . Retrieved 17 February 2023 .

^ "Scottish Greens: Who will the next co-leaders be?" .

Holyrood . 7 July 2025 . Retrieved 9 July 2025 .

^ "Scottish Greens: Who will the next co-leaders be?" .

Holyrood . 7 July 2025 . Retrieved 9 July 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Scottish Parliament profiles of MSPs: Bill Wilson Bill Wilson former MSP on TheyWorkForYou.com v t e Former Scottish National Party MSPs By date first representing the Scottish National Party in the Scottish Parliament 1999 Brian Adam Colin Campbell Bruce Crawford Roseanna Cunningham Dorothy-Grace Elder Margaret Ewing Winnie Ewing Linda Fabiani Duncan Hamilton Adam Ingram Kenny MacAskill Margo MacDonald Tricia Marwick Irene McGugan Fiona McLeod Alasdair Morgan Alex Neil Gil Paterson Lloyd Quinan George Reid Michael Russell Alex Salmond Kay Ullrich Andrew Welsh Sandra White Andrew Wilson 2001 Stewart Stevenson 2003 Rob Gibson Campbell Martin Jim Mather Stewart Maxwell Bruce McFee 2006 Maureen Watt 2007 Bashir Ahmad Aileen Campbell Nigel Don Christopher Harvie Ian McKee Anne McLaughlin Dave Thompson Stefan Tymkewycz Bill Wilson John Wilson 2011 Marco Biagi Chic Brodie Margaret Burgess Roderick Campbell Jim Eadie John Finnie Colin Keir Richard Lyle Angus MacDonald Derek Mackay Mike MacKenzie Joan McAlpine Mark McDonald Aileen McLeod Dennis Robertson Jean Urquhart Bill Walker Paul Wheelhouse 2013 Christian Allard 2016 Jeane Freeman Christina McKelvie Ash Regan Gail Ross Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bill_Wilson_(Scottish_politician)&oldid=1299649710 " Categories : 1963 births Living people Politicians from Glasgow Scottish National Party MSPs Labour Party (UK) people Members of the Scottish Parliament 2007–2011 People educated at Shawlands Academy Alumni of the University of Glasgow Alumni of the University of Aberdeen Alumni of Queen's University Belfast Politicians from Paisley, Renfrewshire Scottish republicans Scottish Green politicians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with obsolete information from June 2020 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Use British English from August 2014 Use dmy dates from September 2021 This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 16:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bill Wilson (Scottish politician) 2 languages Add topic

