Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ministry functions 2 Trivia 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ministry of Culture and Tourism (Turkey) 12 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Deutsch Ελληνικά Français Kiswahili Македонски Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Русский Türkçe اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Government ministry of Turkey Ministry of Culture and Tourism Kültür ve Turizm Bakanlığı Republic of Turkey Ministry of Culture and Tourism building, Ankara Agency overview Formed 2003 Jurisdiction Government of Turkey Headquarters Ankara Annual budget 38.964.106.000 TL (2024) Minister responsible Mehmet Nuri Ersoy Deputy Ministers responsible Batuhan Mumcu Gökhan Yazgı Nadir Alpaslan Serdar Çam Website ktb.gov.tr The Ministry of Culture and Tourism ( Turkish : Kültür ve Turizm Bakanlığı ) is a government ministry of the Republic of Turkey , responsible for culture and tourism affairs in Turkey. Revolving fund management of the ministry is carried by DÖSİMM .

[ 1 ] On July 9, 2018, the newly elected President of Turkey Recep Tayyip Erdoğan announced his cabinet of the new Turkish political system.

Mehmet Nuri Ersoy was appointed Minister of Culture and Tourism.

[ 2 ] Ministry functions [ edit ] The Turkish Ministry of Tourism assigns inspectors who inspect tourism investments and enterprises. This includes inspecting safety measures.

[ 3 ] One of the responsibilities of the ministry is the preservation of manuscripts, so they are available and accessible to researchers.

[ 4 ] Trivia [ edit ] In promoting the country, the ministry often created promotional films for the country. In 2015, the ministry gained controversy after axing a scene from a $4 million-dollar promotional involving Julianne Moore due to her allegedly "poor acting".

[ 5 ] Ruhsar Demirel, of the Nationalist Movement Party , asked social affairs minister Ayşenur İslam : "How reasonable do you find promoting Turkey with the body of such names and women? How do you find, as a woman, giving plenty of money to a Hollywood star to promote Turkey, as if it were the 19th century?", and other politicians criticised her for a "depressive persona".

[ 5 ] In 2017, alongside Turkish Airlines and Turkish tourism companies, the Ministry of Culture and Tourism helped finance Non-Transferable , a romantic comedy film produced by Brendan Bradley .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] In June 2018, the Ministry has sent a directive to the head of the excavations team in Turkey notifying them that according to a new regulation, 51 percent of archaeological excavation teams led by foreign crews should consist of Turkish nationals, the key posts in excavations such as archaeologist, anthropologist, art historian, restaurateur, architect, and photographer, should be reserved for Turkish citizens.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Tourism in Turkey Turkey Cultural Route Festivals References [ edit ] ^ DÖSİMM page ^ "İşte Erdoğan'ın açıkladığı kabine listesi" .

Cumhuriyet (in Turkish). 2018-07-10 . Retrieved 2018-07-10 .

^ "Turizm Yatırım, İşletme ve Kuruluşlarının Denetimi Hakkında Yönetmelik" .

teftis.ktb.gov.tr . Retrieved 2025-01-22 .

^ "Manuscripts" .

Ministry of Culture and Tourism of Turkey .

^ a b Lee, Benjamin (1 April 2015).

"Julianne Moore cut from Turkey tourist board ad for 'poor acting' " .

The Guardian .

^ Gutelle, Sam.

"Turkish Airlines Gets In On The YouTuber Film Trend With 'Non-Transferable' " .

Tubefilter .

^ Lazar, Shira (23 February 2016).

"How Do You Make a Movie in Europe With Almost No Budget?" .

Huffington Post . Retrieved 21 March 2017 .

^ New regulation imposes 'Turkish majority crew' rule for archeological excavations External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ministry of Culture and Tourism (Turkey) .

Official website Tourism portal Tourism Strategy of Turkey - 2023 (2007) v t e Ministries of Turkey Ministries Agriculture and Forestry ( list ) Culture and Tourism ( list ) Energy and Natural Resources ( list ) Environment, Urbanisation and Climate Change ( list ) Family and Social Services ( list ) Foreign Affairs ( list ) Health ( list ) Industry and Technology ( list ) Interior ( list ) Justice ( list ) National Defense ( list ) National Education ( list ) Labour and Social Security ( list ) Trade ( list ) Transport and Infrastructure ( list ) Treasury and Finance ( list ) Youth and Sports ( list ) Offices Foreign Affairs EU Affairs and Chief Negotiator Defunct Prime Ministry ( list ) Deputy Prime Ministries ( list ) Construction and Settlement Coordination Customs and Monopolies Development Economic Affairs Enterprises EU Affairs and Chief Negotiator General Staff Local Governments Navy Sharia and the Foundations Village Affairs Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Israel Academics CiNii Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ministry_of_Culture_and_Tourism_(Turkey)&oldid=1294711070 " Categories : Ministry of Culture and Tourism (Turkey) 2003 establishments in Turkey Tourism ministries Culture ministries National archaeological organizations Ministries established in 2003 Government ministries of Turkey Hidden categories: CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Turkish-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 10:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ministry of Culture and Tourism (Turkey) 12 languages Add topic

