Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early years 1.2 Political radicalism 1.3 Protestant, Catholic, Jew 1.4 "Cut flower culture" 1.5 Opposition to Civil Rights Movement 1.6 Final years, death, and legacy 2 Footnotes 3 Works 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Will Herberg 2 languages Čeština Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American writer, intellectual and scholar Will Herberg Herberg in 1939 Born William Herberg ( 1901-06-30 ) June 30, 1901 Lyakhavichy , Minsk Governorate , Russian Empire Died March 26, 1977 (1977-03-26) (aged 75) Morristown, New Jersey , U.S.

Occupation Political activist, theologian, writer Subject Politics , theology , anti-communism Spouse Anna Thompson Herberg This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e William Herberg (June 30, 1901 – March 26, 1977) was an American writer, intellectual, and scholar. A communist political activist during his early years, Herberg gained wider public recognition as a social philosopher and sociologist of religion , as well as a Jewish theologian. He was a conservative thinker during the 1950s and a contributor to the National Review magazine.

Biography [ edit ] Early years [ edit ] William Herberg, commonly known as "Will," was born on June 30, 1901, to a Jewish family in the shtetl of Lyakhavichy , Belarus , located near the city of Minsk in what was then part of the Russian Empire .

[ 1 ] His father, Hyman Louis Herberg (1874–1938), and mother, the former Sarah Wolkow (1872–1942) were themselves born in the same provincial village.

[ 1 ] Although no records remain to document the family's financial status, Herberg's biographer indicates that the family was not impoverished, with his father the recipient of a gymnasium education and successful enough as an electrical contractor to pay for the family's emigration from the anti-semitic Tsarist regime to a new life in America in 1904.

[ 1 ] Arriving in New York City , the Herberg family took up residence in a poor Jewish neighborhood in Brooklyn , New York .

[ 1 ] The family's economic position deteriorated in America, however, and Will's parents were divorced about ten years after arriving in the United States, with Will and his younger brother raised by his mother, who earned money as a housekeeper and small-scale manufacturer of knit fabric belts.

[ 2 ] The boys aided the family income by helping with belt-making, although a very high priority was placed by his mother on education, and great financial sacrifices were made to ensure that the two boys stayed on an academically oriented path.

[ 2 ] Will attended public school in Brooklyn, entering the prestigious Boys' High School in February 1915.

[ 2 ] During his high school years, Herberg demonstrated great capacity as a student, studying mathematics, physics , German , Hebrew , and French , while writing poetry in his spare time.

[ 2 ] Herberg graduated from Boys' High School in June 1918 and entered the tuition-free City College that same fall.

[ 2 ] While at City College, Herberg studied mathematics, English literature, and various physical sciences, developing a keen interest in psychology and the writings of Sigmund Freud .

[ 2 ] While his grades in these subjects were above average, he had difficulty with requirements in physical education and exhibited an antipathy to required courses in military science .

[ 3 ] Herberg was suspended from City College in the fall of 1920 due to frequent absences from military science class, accentuated by an altercation with the officer in charge of the course.

[ 4 ] Herberg finished his career at City College having completed 94 of the 131.5 credits needed for graduation.

[ 4 ] Although he never earned a bachelor's degree at City College, Herberg later falsely claimed to have degrees from Columbia University , including a PhD in 1932.

[ 5 ] However, he later received three honorary doctorates, the first in 1956.

[ 6 ] Political radicalism [ edit ] The exact timetable of Will Herberg's radicalization is unclear; according to his brother, Ted Herberg, Will's difficulty with the military science officer, his subsequent dismissal from college, and the troubled financial situation of his family led him to the ideas of revolutionary socialism .

[ 7 ] Be that as it may, by 1925 Herberg was a prominent member of the Young Workers League (YWL) — youth section of the Workers (Communist) Party — and a contributor to the group's weekly newspaper, The Young Worker .

[ 4 ] In the fall of 1925, Herberg was elected a delegate by YWL District 2 (New York City) to the organization's 3rd National Convention, held in Chicago.

[ 4 ] The 3rd Convention of the YWL elected Herberg to the governing National Executive Committee, as part of which he served as director of "Agitprop" (Agitation and Propaganda).

[ 4 ] Herberg was also named a member of a four-member editorial committee for The Young Worker, taking over as chief editor of that publication for acting editor Max Shachtman effective with the issue of November 7, 1925.

[ 4 ] In 1925, Herberg married a YWL comrade, the former Anna Thompson, a resident of Brownsville, Brooklyn .

[ 4 ] The couple would become intellectually compatible throughout Herberg's long ideological journey from communist youth journalist to conservative political writer and prominent Jewish theologian.

[ 4 ] The couple did not have children.

[ 4 ] Anna suddenly passed away in mid-1959.

[ 8 ] Following the split of party leader Jay Lovestone and his co-thinkers in 1929, Herberg remained loyal to them, a decision earning his expulsion from the party on September 10, 1929.

[ 9 ] Thereafter Herberg joined the so-called Lovestoneites , remaining with that organization until its termination at the end of 1940, serving as editor of the group's weekly newspaper, Workers Age.

[ 10 ] Protestant, Catholic, Jew [ edit ] He later turned away from Marxism and became a religious conservative , founding the quarterly Judaism with Robert Gordis and Milton R. Konvitz . During the 1960s, he was the religion editor of the conservative journal National Review , and he also taught at Drew University .

Herberg's 1955 book Protestant, Catholic, Jew: An Essay in American Religious Sociology created a sociological framework for the study of religion in the United States. Herberg demonstrated how immigration and American ethnic culture were reflected in religious movements and institutions.

[ 11 ] It has been described as "one of the most influential books ever written about American religion." [ 12 ] During the 1950s, that book and the 1951 essay Judaism and Modern Man set out influential positions on Judaism and on the American religious tradition in general.

Herberg also wrote that anti-Catholicism is the antisemitism of secular Jewish intellectuals.

[ 13 ] "Cut flower culture" [ edit ] For some time, Herberg has mistakenly been credited with coining the phrase "cut-flower culture" to describe the spiritual rootlessness of modern European and American societies. Though he did refer to the concept in his 1951 book, Judaism and Modern Man , he credits the idea to another: "The attempt made in recent decades by secularist thinkers to disengage these religious values from their religious context, in the assurance that they could live a life on their own as a 'humanistic' ethic, has resulted in what one writer has called our 'cut-flower' culture [emphasis mine].

[ 14 ] " The original author to whom Herberg referred to was Quaker Philosopher of Religion, D. Elton Trueblood , who coined the term "cut-flower civilization" in his 1944 book, The Predicament of Modern Man .

[ 15 ] Opposition to Civil Rights Movement [ edit ] In his September 7, 1965 National Review article, "'Civil Rights' and Violence: Who Are the Guilty Ones?", Herberg wrote of his opposition or skepticism towards the Civil Rights Movement , feeling, like many of his colleagues at National Review at the time, that the civil rights campaign was moving too quickly and broke up the fabric of American society in an overly socially disruptive manner, not friendly to proper social cohesion. They supported what is often termed the Booker T. Washington position of "gradual reform." Final years, death, and legacy [ edit ] Herberg's final published work saw print in the middle of 1973.

[ 16 ] From that time his health deteriorated steadily, culminating with the discovery of an inoperable brain tumor .

[ 17 ] Herberg died on March 26, 1977; he was 75 years old at the time of his death.

[ 17 ] Herberg's memorial service was held in the Great Hall of Drew University in Madison, New Jersey , and was attended by a throng of rabbis, professors, and former students and political associates.

[ 17 ] Herberg was buried in Morris Plains, New Jersey , next to the grave of his previously departed wife, Anna.

[ 17 ] Herberg was a traditionalist conservative and contributor to traditionalist publications such as Russell Kirk 's Modern Age and to William F. Buckley, Jr.

's conservative magazine National Review , which published a special issue in August 1977 in Herberg's honor.

[ 17 ] Footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b c d Harry J. Ausmus, Will Herberg: From Right to Right.

Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 1987; pg. 1.

^ a b c d e f Ausmus, Will Herberg, pg. 2.

^ Ausmus, Will Herberg, pp. 2-3.

^ a b c d e f g h i Ausmus, Will Herberg, pg. 3.

^ Gaston, K. Healan (2013). "The Cold War Romance of Religious Authenticity: Will Herberg, William F. Buckley Jr., and the Rise of the New Right".

Journal of American History .

99 (4): 1133–58 [p. 1137].

doi : 10.1093/jahist/jas588 .

^ The Encyclopedia of Religion and Society ^ Cited in Ausmus, Will Herberg, pg. 3.

^ "Will Herberg Papers".

Drew University Archives .

{{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |url= ( help ) ^ "Denounces Provocative Acts of Lovestone Gang," Daily Worker, vol. 6, no. 162 (Sept. 13, 1929), pg. 4.

^ Gaston, "The Cold War Romance of Religious Authenticity," pp. 1137-1138.

^ Schwartz, Joel (2004).

"Protestant, Catholic, Jew... (retrospective book review)" .

Public Interest .

155 (Spring): 106– 136.

^ Wolfe, Alan (2003).

The Transformation of American Religion: How We Actually Live our Faith . New York, NY: Free Press. p.

64 .

^ The Myth of Hitler's Pope ^ Herberg, Will (1951).

Judaism and Modern Man: An Interpretation of Jewish Religion . New York, NY: Farrar, Straus, and Young. p. 91.

^ Trueblood, D. Elton (1944).

The Predicament of Modern Man . New York, NY: Harper and Brothers. pp.

59– 60.

^ Ausmus, Will Herberg, pg. 210.

^ a b c d e Ausmus, Will Herberg, pg. 211.

Works [ edit ] American Revolutionary Traditions.

New York: New Workers School, 1932.

The Heritage of the Civil War.

New York : Workers Age Publishing Association, 1932.

Dialectical Materialism.

New York: New Workers School, 1933.

Historical Materialism.

New York: New Workers School, 1933.

The NRA and American Labor.

New York : Workers Age Publishing Association, 1933.

Theoretical System of Leninism.

New York: New Workers School, 1934.

Outline for the Study of Dialectical Materialism and the Life of Man.

New York: New Workers School, 1935.

Foundations of Marxism: Study Outline.

New York: New Workers School, 1936.

Marxism and Modern Political Thought.

New York: New Workers School, 1936.

Marxism and Political Thought.

New York: New Workers School, 1930s.

Which Program for Revolutionists?

New York: New Workers School, 1930s.

The CIO, Labor's New Challenge.

New York: Workers Age Publishing Association, 1937.

Rivera Murals: Permanent Exhibition.

New York: International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union , 1943.

Bureaucracy and Democracy in Labor Unions.

New York: Great Island Conference, 1947.

The Theology of Reinhold Niebuhr.

New York: Frontier Fellowship, 1950.

Judaism and Modern Man: An Interpretation of Jewish Religion.

New York, Farrar, Straus and Young , 1951.

"Jewish Labor Movement in the United States: Early Years to World War I," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, vol. 5, no. 4 (July 1952), pp. 501–523.

In JSTOR .

Protestant, Catholic, Jew: An Essay in American Religious Sociology.

Garden City, NY: Doubleday , 1955.

Jewish Labor in the US: Its History and Contributions to American Life.

New York: Jewish Labor Committee , Atran Center for Jewish Culture, 1955.

The Writings Of Martin Buber.

(Editor.) New York: Meridian Books, 1956.

Four Existentialist Theologians: A Reader from the Works of Jacques Maritain , Nicholas Berdyaev , Martin Buber , and Paul Tillich .

Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1958.

Athens and Jerusalem: Confrontation and Dialogue Durham: University of New Hampshire , 1965.

Challenge to Morality: A Symposium.

(Contributor.) Tallahassee, FL: Florida State University , 1966.

Dimensions Symposium: Human Values in a Technological Society.

(Contributor.) New York: UAHC, 1971.

On Academic Freedom.

(Contributor.) Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, 1971.

Martin Buber: Personalist Philosopher in an Age of Depersonalization.

West Hartford, CT: Saint Joseph College , 1972.

The State of the Churches in the USA 1973 as Shown in their Own Official Yearbooks: A Study Research.

Sun City, AZ: Ecumenism Research Agency, 1973.

Faith Enacted As History: Essays in Biblical Theology.

Philadelphia: Westminster Press , 1976.

From Marxism to Judaism: The Collected Essays of Will Herberg.

(David G. Dalin, ed.) New York: Marcus Wiener Publishing Co., 1989.

Jewish Perspectives on Christianity: Leo Baeck, Martin Buber, Franz Rosenzweig, Will Herberg, and Abraham J. Heschel.

(Contributor.) New York: Crossroad , 1990.

Further reading [ edit ] Robert J. Alexander, The Right Opposition: The Lovestoneites and the International Communist Opposition of the 1930s.

Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1981, ISBN 0-313-22070-0 .

Harry J. Ausmus, Will Herberg: A Bio-Bibliography.

Westport, CT: Greenwood Press , 1986, ISBN 0-313-25067-7 .

Harry J. Ausmus, Will Herberg: From Right to Right.

Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press , 1987.

ISBN 0-8078-1724-4 .

K. Healan Gaston, "The Cold War Romance of Religious Authenticity: Will Herberg, William F. Buckley Jr., and the Rise of the New Right," Journal of American History , vol. 99, no. 4 (Dec. 2013), pp. 1133–1158.

doi:10.1093/jahist/jas588 Paul LeBlanc and Tim Davenport (eds.), The "American Exceptionalism" of Jay Lovestone and His Comrades, 1929-1940.

Leiden, NL: Brill, 2015, ISBN 978-90-04-22443-8 .

External links [ edit ] The author of Herberg's entry in American National Biography and an old student of his writes about him Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic 2 Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Poland Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Will_Herberg&oldid=1300091012 " Categories : 1901 births 1977 deaths American male non-fiction writers American sociologists Jewish sociologists Jewish American non-fiction writers Drew University faculty American people of Russian-Jewish descent American Jewish theologians Philosophers of Judaism Jewish philosophers American communists American Marxists Right Opposition Boys High School (Brooklyn) alumni Former Marxists Hidden categories: CS1 errors: requires URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 06:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Will Herberg 2 languages Add topic

