Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classification Toggle Classification subsection 1.1 By types 1.2 By regions 2 Characteristics Toggle Characteristics subsection 2.1 Layout 2.2 Elements 2.2.1 Artificial mountains 2.2.2 Water 2.2.3 Stones 2.3 Architecture 2.4 Calligraphy and paintings 2.5 Plants 3 Philosophy 4 Brief history 5 Prominent Lingnan gardens 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Lingnan garden 3 languages 한국어 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chinese garden style This article is part of the series on Cantonese culture People Cantonese people in Hong Kong Punti–Hakka Clan Wars Language Grammar Phonology Orthography Yale Romanization Jyutping Yue Taishanese Poetry Architecture Diu lau Tong lau Garden Canton Tower Visual arts Ivory carving Jade carving Teochew woodcarving Penjing Porcelain Furniture Sekwan ware School of painting Performing arts Folk songs Nam yum Opera Instrumental music Gou Wu Pop music Cinema of Hong Kong Martial arts Hung Ga Choy gar Mok Gar Wing Chun Choy Li Fut Chow Gar Butterfly sword Cuisine Yum cha Dim sum Leung cha Tong sui Philosophy Lingnan Confucianism Customs and traditions New Year flowermarket Lion dance Nin Lai Commercial traditions Pre-wedding customs Wedding customs Villain hitting Bone collecting Taoist deities Wong Tai Sin Hung Shing Mazu Tam Kung Yunmou Folktales The Legend of Five Goats Lady Sin Cultural symbols Red cotton flower Hong Kong orchid Macau lotus Sampan Cultural hubs Guangzhou Foshan Nanning Hong Kong Macau v t e Lingnan garden ( Cantonese Jyutping : Ling 5 naam 4 jyun 4 lam 4 ; Traditional Chinese : 嶺南園林), also called Cantonese garden , is a style of garden design native to Lingnan – the traditionally Cantonese provinces of Guangdong and Guangxi in southern China. It is one of the major styles of Chinese garden , along with the Jiangnan garden (e.g., the Classical Gardens of Suzhou ) and Sichuanese garden .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The Lingnan region lies to the south of the Nanling Mountains , spanning southern Fujian , Guangdong, and Guangxi. The extensive river network, strong sunlight, and regular monsoon in the region contributes to a lush subtropical natural landscape. With this rich natural scenery, people in Lingnan have been able to create a rich and colorful style of traditional garden distinct from gardens in other Han Chinese regions.

[ 3 ] Classification [ edit ] By types [ edit ] Lingnan garden consists of several substyles, such as royal gardens, private gardens, and public gardens. A good example of royal Lingnan garden is Guangzhou's Gauyiu Garden [ zh ; zh-yue ] (Jyutping: Gau 2 jiu 6 jyun 4 ; Traditional Chinese: 九曜園, literally "garden of nine glories"), built by Lau Yan , the first king of the Southern Han dynasty.

[ 4 ] Built in the style of the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period (10th century), it laid down the foundation of modern Lingnan style and is one of the more well-preserved gardens from that period. Prominent examples of private Lingnan gardens include the "four great gardens of central Guangdong": Yuyum Sanfong , Leung's Garden , Ching Fai Garden , and Ho Garden . Among them, Yuyum Sanfong is considered the best example of classical Lingnan garden, having used features such as lintels with stone carvings, mock mountains made of stone heaps, geometric pool shapes, and massive use of wood carvings.

Gauyiu Garden Private Lingnan gardens Yuyum Sanfong ("Yuyin Shanfang" in Mandarin Chinese ) in Panyu , Guangzhou , is commonly cited as a representative example of Lingnan garden.

Ching Fai Garden in Shunde .

Leung's Garden in Foshan .

Ho Garden in Dongguan .

By regions [ edit ] Guangdong's gardens have been the mainstream of Lingnan gardens. They have been noted for their inclusion of stone heaps as mock mountains, slowly rising roofs and alleys, various sculptures and carvings, contrasting colors of blue and green, and plants that bloom in all four seasons. Guangxi's gardens tend to be based more on natural landscapes, manifested in stone cliffs and engraved walls.

[ citation needed ] Characteristics [ edit ] Overall, the most commonly discussed characteristics of Lingnan garden include: [ 5 ] Layout [ edit ] Lingnan garden primarily utilizes courtyard layout. The use of courtyard is a prominent trait of Lingnan garden, whose smallness and fineness are said to be comparable with those of classical Japanese garden . The vast majority of private Lingnan gardens use courtyard layout.

Elements [ edit ] Artificial mountains [ edit ] When it comes to artificial mountains (Jyutping: Gaa 2 saan 1 ; Traditional Chinese: 假山), Lingnan garden utilizes (1) cliffs; (2) islands; (3) artificial reefs ; and (4) heaps. This style rarely uses mud to build artificial mountains.

Water [ edit ] Lingnan garden is said to be heavily based around control of water, involving waterways of various patterns: (1) "cliff-waterfall-depth" pattern; (2) lake pattern; (3) depth without waterfall; (4) curving waterways; and (5) wellspring.

Stones [ edit ] Lingnan garden uses a different set of stones from those used by Jiangnan and Northern Chinese gardens. It utilizes local minerals such as Minnan granite, Hainan coral stone, and Taiwan Guru stone. Gardens of this style prefer not to stack up its stones, but instead have them spread outward horizontally, with various methods and patterns of outward spreading.

Architecture [ edit ] See also: Lingnan architecture Lingnan garden uses towers, bridges, and corridors. This style either uses "high walls and cold lanes" to divide a garden into a combination of multiple courtyards, or simply connect the buildings and the courtyards as one single whole. The architecture involves high pillars, wide corridors, and thick walls. "Three carvings and three sculpting" (Jyutping: Saam 1 diu 1 saam 1 sou 3 ; Traditional Chinese: 三雕三塑) – carvings made of wood, brick and stone, and sculptures made of clay, mud, and granite – are prevalent. Classical Lingnan gardens utilize full gardens of three carvings and three sculpting, as shown in Bou Mak Garden (Jyutping: Bou 2 mak 6 jyun 4 ; Traditional Chinese: 寶墨園, literally "Garden of Treasure and Ink") in Panyu . Buildings in Lingnan garden are typically constructed in classical Lingnan style .

[ 6 ] Architecture of Lingnan gardens Bou Mak Garden.

Bou Mak Garden uses a large amount of carvings.

Yuyum Sanfong uses Lingnan architecture.

Calligraphy and paintings [ edit ] Yuyum Sanfong uses some calligraphy as decorations, alongside massive amount of carvings – the latter of which is typical of Cantonese gardens.

Classical Lingnan garden uses calligraphy and paintings only sparingly, and modern Lingnan garden is even less inclined to do so. There are, however, several notable instances of such in Lingnan garden design. Yuyum Sanfong, for instance, has the calligraphy "餘地三弓紅雨足，蔭天一角綠雲深" ( Classical Chinese , literally "This land is just as large as three bows, but rich in red rain; Though it is just a corner under the sky, it is abundant with green clouds") written on its main door.

Plants [ edit ] Vegetation in Lingnan garden is summarized with the sentence "all-season flowers, scenery of tropical rain belt ". Lingnan gardens use native, mainly subtropical plant species such as palm trees (including coconut trees ), flamevine , orchids , Chinese banyan , and Lychee trees.

Philosophy [ edit ] See also: Lingnan Confucianism Lingnan garden is said to embody the philosophy behind Cantonese culture [ 7 ] – commerce, pragmatism, and openness to foreign ideas. For much of the past millennium, Cantonese people have served as major merchants of the Chinese Empire , especially when it came to trade activities with Western Europeans and Southeast Asians . This results in a strong commercial tradition among Cantonese. This distinguishes them from other Han Chinese groups – such as the Northern groups, who have formed the empire's politicians and bureaucrats , or the Wuyue group , who have served prominently as scholars and artists. Cantonese gardens are less bounded by royal standards and frequently adopt foreign (i.e., non-Chinese) elements like stained glass . Also, Cantonese are far less heavily invested in Confucian philosophy, resulting in a style closer to the average people – such as a tendency to fuse gardens with buildings that have mundane purposes.

Brief history [ edit ] According to historical records, people in Lingnan were already building gardens during the reign of the Nanyue king Zhao Tuo (? – 137 BC) in Guangzhou. Their royal gardens took after the styles of the Qin Empire's . Afterwards, however, with the decline of the Nanyue regime, Lingnan royal gardens also disappeared. In much of the two millennia that followed, Lingnan had served as the fringe territory of various Chinese dynasties , resulting in a relative lack of royal garden styles. Nonetheless, the area around Guangzhou became an important port for these dynasties, resulting in a gradual rise of the social and economic importance of the region. This and frequent cultural exchanges with outside powers caused the development of a folk garden style – the classical Lingnan garden.

[ 8 ] Prominent Lingnan gardens [ edit ] Hong Kong's Lai Chi Kok has an example of a Lingnan garden.

Yuyum Sanfong Leung's Garden Ching Fai Garden Ho Garden Bou Mak Garden See also [ edit ] Cantonese culture Cantonese penjing Sichuanese garden Japanese garden Korean garden Chinese garden References [ edit ] ^ "岭南园林的营造手法与艺术特色" . Archived from the original on 30 July 2017 . Retrieved 17 September 2017 .

^ 劉庭風. (2003). 嶺南園林: 福建, 臺灣園林. 同濟大學出版社.

^ Yuanyuan, C. (2008). Inspiration of Lingnan Garden to Inhabitation Landscape Design [J]. Huazhong Architecture, 11, 042.

^ 薬洲 南国传经地，播种文明六百年 – 《 南方都市报 》 ^ 周璐. (2012). 岭南园林特色探析. 绿色科技, (2), 53–54.

^ He, J. (2005).

The Classic Chinese Lingnan Garden in Housing in Sustainable Development – A comparative study in Canton, China . The 2005 World Sustainable Building Conference.

^ 浅析清代岭南私家园林造园艺术 ^ Luo, S. Y., & Zhang, W. Y. (2008). The Impact of Ocean Culture to Lingnan Garden [J]. Guangdong Landscape Architecture, 6, 8–10.

v t e Guangdong topics Guangzhou ( capital ) General History Politics Economy Police Geography Cities Metropolitan areas Chaoshan Pearl River Delta Sanyi (Sam Yup) Sze Yup (Siyi) Leizhou Peninsula Regions Pearl River Delta Yuexi Yuebei Yuedong Pearl River East River West River Nanling Mountains Pratas Island and the Vereker Banks (claimed) Shamian Island Education Guangzhou Education Shenzhen Education Culture Lingnan culture Cantonese people Varieties of Chinese Yue Chinese Hailufeng Teochew Hakka Lingnan architecture Tong lau Lingnan garden Cantonese embroidery Teochew woodcarving Lingnan penjing Canton porcelain Lingnan School Music Cantonese opera Naamyam Guangdong music Gou Wu Cantonese poetry Cantonese nationalism Hung Ga Wing Chun Lingnan Confucianism Flowermarket Cantonese lion dance Wong Tai Sin Hung Shing Cantonese merchants Red cotton flower Cantonese folktales The Legend of Five Goats Villain hitting Hakka people Teochew people Zhuang people Chu Hua Yuan Cuisine Cantonese cuisine Beef chow fun Chow mein Char siu Roasted suckling pig Bird's nest soup Seafood birdsnest Shumai Cantonese fried rice Dim sum Yum cha Leung cha Tong sui Hakka cuisine Teochew cuisine Category Commons v t e East Asian traditional gardens and landscape design Styles Chinese garden Japanese garden Korean garden Jiangnan style Classical Gardens of Suzhou Yu Garden Gardens around the West Lake Zhan Garden Mochou Lake Royal style Huaqing Pool Beihai Park Zhongnanhai Summer Palace Old Summer Palace Fragrant Hills Chengde Mountain Resort Rear Garden of Changdeokgung Katsura Imperial Villa Shugakuin Imperial Villa Hayama Imperial Villa Suzaki Imperial Villa North China style Garden of the Prince Gong Mansion Gardens in Peking University Lingnan style Ke Yuan Qing Hui Yuan Yu Yin Shan Fang Sichuanese style Du Fu Thatched Cottage v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lingnan_garden&oldid=1181044462 " Categories : Lingnan garden Gardens in China Chinese gardening styles Chinese gardens Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2020 This page was last edited on 20 October 2023, at 14:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lingnan garden 3 languages Add topic

