Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Controversies 3 Online publication 4 Return to print 5 Core editorial staff 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents The American Spectator 4 languages Deutsch فارسی Română Sardu Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Conservative American magazine This article is about the conservative political magazine. For the 20th-century literary magazine, see American Spectator (literary magazine) . For the US edition of the British political magazine, see The Spectator .

The American Spectator Editor R. Emmett Tyrrell Jr.

Categories Politics Founder George Nathan Truman Newberry First issue 1967 ; 58 years ago ( 1967 ) Company American Spectator Foundation Country United States Based in Alexandria , Virginia , U.S.

Language English Website spectator .org ISSN 0148-8414 This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The American Spectator is a conservative American magazine covering news and politics, edited by R. Emmett Tyrrell Jr.

and published by the non-profit American Spectator Foundation. It was founded in 1967 by Tyrrell (the current editor-in-chief) and Wladyslaw Pleszczynski (its editorial director as of 1980).

[ citation needed ] The magazine has featured the writings of several authors such as Canadian Malcolm Gladwell , Greg Gutfeld and Dinesh D'Souza . Current frequently contributing writings include Daniel Flynn , Paul Kengor , Robert Stacy McCain , Scott McKay, George Neumayr, and George Parry.

[ citation needed ] It gained popularity in the 1990s during its investigation of Bill Clinton under what became known as its Arkansas Project . During this same time period, The American Spectator received a $1.8 million donation from Richard Mellon Scaife .

[ 1 ] Despite this success, the magazine has not been able to maintain the circulation it reached at this time and has since been accused of "hit jobs", [ 2 ] lack of corroboration, [ 3 ] and denial of the scientific consensus around global warming.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] The magazine American Spectator is published by the nonprofit media organization American Spectator Foundation. The foundation itself was founded in 1969, with "the stated goal of bringing quality journalism to the forefront of the national political conversation".

[ 5 ] The magazine's circulation increased tenfold during the investigation of Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton under what became known as its " Arkansas Project ".

[ 3 ] However, American political commentator Rush Limbaugh has been credited for the popularity of The American Spectator , due to his free promotion of the magazine and the paid advertisements on Limbaugh's radio and TV shows, which reached an audience of 20 million.

[ 3 ] Following financial shortfalls, including a resistance from Tyrell to have the Arkansas Project audited , The American Spectator was sold to George Gilder , leading to layoffs and a relocation to Great Barrington, Massachusetts .

[ 6 ] Circulation has not returned to the near 300,000 that the magazine saw during its investigation of the Clintons.

[ 6 ] Controversies [ edit ] In the early 1990s, The American Spectator published two lengthy essays by writer David Brock , "The Real Anita Hill" and the "Troopergate story" , both of alleged inappropriate behavior by then-President Bill Clinton.

[ 3 ] Brock has since denounced the former article in the 2003 book Blinded by the Right: the Conscience of an Ex-Conservative , in which he states that the article caused the magazine's content to move "away from thoughtful essays and scholarly reviews and humor pieces" to "hit jobs".

[ 2 ] In 2011, Assistant Editor Patrick Howley published a piece detailing his infiltration of a protest in Washington, D.C. In the article, Howley asserts his aim to "mock and undermine" the protest against American imperialism , and writes in the first person about his experiences protesting at the National Air and Space Museum .

[ 7 ] This article, and the methods detailed within, was condemned by The Guardian , The Atlantic's "Atlantic Wire" blog, and The Economist , because they believed the correspondents who worked on the story had conflated journalism and politics.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Matt Steinglass of The Economist wrote that Howley "winds up offering a vision of politics as a kind of self-focused performance art, or perhaps (to say the same thing) a version of Jackass ." [ 11 ] In September 2020, the American Spectator Foundation filed a lawsuit in federal court against Press Holdings Media Group, a for-profit company that owns the British conservative magazine The Spectator . The lawsuit alleged that the company used American Spectator 's trademark name and imagery when publishing the Spectator USA website and the U.S. version of their magazine.

[ 12 ] The American Spectator has been criticized for its "hype and hysteria" and "out-of-control screeds that attack the obvious suspects and lack corroboration".

[ 3 ] The environmental campaigning organization Greenpeace claims that the magazine is part of a supposed "conservative media network with clear Koch influence [that] serves as a reliable platform for attacks on the scientific consensus of global warming".

[ 4 ] Online publication [ edit ] This section needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( August 2016 ) The magazine's final monthly print publication was released in July/August 2014. While The American Spectator did issue a September/October PDF -only version late in mid-November 2014, the masthead still claimed that it was "published monthly, except for combined July/Aug and Jan/Feb issues." A note from Editorial Director Wladyslaw Pleszczynski admitted that "...we have some problems of our own." [ 13 ] Pleszczynski added that the issue "was ready for release well over a month ago but for reasons affecting many a print publication these days couldn't be published on actual pages and after considerable delay is now being released in digital form only." Subsequently, online publications have become permanent and available.

[ 14 ] The latest editions of the magazine: Summer 2021 Magazine "The Biden Economy" [ 15 ] Winter 2020 Magazine "Liberty in Crisis" [ 16 ] Summer 2020 Magazine "Make America Great – Yet Again" [ 17 ] Fall 2019 Magazine "Technical Difficulties" [ 18 ] Return to print [ edit ] The magazine returned to print in the fall of 2017 under the direction of Hannah Rowan. It is published in the winter and summer.

[ 19 ] Core editorial staff [ edit ] Editor in Chief: R. Emmett Tyrrell Jr.

Editorial Director: Wladyslaw Pleszczynski Publisher: Melissa Mackenzie Managing Editor: Hannah Rowan Senior Editors: F. H. Buckley, Daniel J. Flynn , Paul Kengor , George Neumayr, Grover C. Norquist, Ben Stein Contributing Editors: Jed Babbin , David Catron, Dov Fischer, Shmuel Klatzkin, Jeffrey Lord , Robert Stacy McCain , George Parry , Arnold Steinberg, Larry Thornberry References [ edit ] ^ Lewis, Neil A.

(April 15, 1998).

"Almost $2 Million Spent in Magazine's Anti-Clinton Project, but on What?" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 11, 2007 . Retrieved February 13, 2017 .

^ a b Brock, David (2003).

Blinded by the Right: The Conscience of an Ex-Conservative . Random House, Inc.

ISBN 978-1-4000-4728-4 .

An entire chapter (Chapter 5) is devoted to describing Brock's experience writing "The Real Anita Hill" article and book in the early 1990s. The "hit jobs" quote is from p. 110.

^ a b c d e "American Journalism Review – Archives" .

ajrarchive.org . Retrieved August 11, 2024 .

^ a b "American Spectator Foundation – Greenpeace USA" . June 26, 2015 . Retrieved August 11, 2024 .

^ "The American Spectator Foundation | About" .

amspecfoundation.org . Retrieved August 11, 2024 .

^ a b York, Byron (November 1, 2001).

"The Life and Death of The American Spectator" .

The Atlantic .

ISSN 2151-9463 . Retrieved August 11, 2024 .

^ "The American Spectator : The Spectacle Blog : Standoff in D.C" . Archived from the original on October 23, 2011.

^ McVeigh, Karen (October 10, 2011).

"Washington protest: American Spectator condemned over article" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on March 12, 2017 . Retrieved December 17, 2016 .

^ Coscarelli, Joe (October 10, 2011).

" 'Journalist' Poses As Protester, Gets Pepper-Sprayed for a Story" .

Daily Intelligencer .

Archived from the original on October 11, 2011 . Retrieved October 10, 2011 .

^ Coates, Ta-Nehisi (October 10, 2011).

"This Is Why We Can't Have Nice Things" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on March 12, 2017 . Retrieved March 11, 2017 .

^ "Conservative "Jackass" " .

The Economist . October 11, 2011 . Retrieved July 10, 2019 .

^ Brittain, Blake (September 2, 2020).

"American Spectator Alleges Spectator Magazine Infringes Mark" . Bloomberg Law. Archived from the original on June 22, 2024 . Retrieved June 22, 2024 .

^ Pleszczynski, Wlady (September–October 2014).

"The Defiant Ones" (PDF) . About This Month.

The American Spectator . Vol. 47, no.

6– 7. p. 2.

ISSN 0148-8414 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on July 3, 2015 . Retrieved January 8, 2015 .

^ "The American Spectator | USA News and PoliticsThe American Spectator | USA News and Politics" .

The American Spectator | USA News and Politics . Retrieved October 17, 2021 .

^ "Magazine | The American Spectator | USA News and PoliticsThe American Spectator | USA News and Politics" .

The American Spectator | USA News and Politics . December 6, 2019 . Retrieved October 17, 2021 .

^ R. Emmett Tyrrell, Jr, Wladyslaw Pleszczynski (Winter 2020).

"THE AMERICAN SPECTATOR "Liberty in Crisis" " .

E.g.The American Spectator : 122.

^ R. Emmett Tyrrell, Jr., Wladyslaw Pleszczynski (Summer 2020).

"THE AMERICAN SPECTATOR "Make Amerika great – yet again" " .

E.g.The American Spectator : 87.

^ R. Emmett Tyrrell, Jr., Wlady Pleszczynski (Fall 2019).

"The American Spectator "TECHNICAL DIFFICULTIES" " .

E.g.The American Spectator : 71.

^ "American Spectator Foundation" .

InfluenceWatch .

Further reading [ edit ] David Brock, Blinded by the Right: The Conscience of an Ex-Conservative , Crown , 2002.

ISBN 0-8129-3099-1 R. Emmett Tyrrell Jr. (ed.), Orthodoxy: The American Spectator's 20th Anniversary Anthology , Harper & Row , 1987.

ISBN 0-06-015818-2 External links [ edit ] Official website York, Byron (November 2001).

"The Life and Death of The American Spectator " .

The Atlantic Monthly .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_American_Spectator&oldid=1299988123 " Categories : Conservative magazines published in the United States Monthly magazines published in the United States News magazines published in the United States Online magazines published in the United States Magazines established in 1967 Magazines disestablished in 2014 Magazines published in Virginia New Right (United States) Online magazines with defunct print editions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from March 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from August 2016 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 16:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The American Spectator 4 languages Add topic

