Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and first marriage 2 Marriage to Mill 3 Own work 4 Death and recognition 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Harriet Taylor Mill 31 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaelg Galego 한국어 Italiano עברית മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English philosopher and women's rights advocate (1807–1858) Harriet Taylor Mill Portrait in the National Portrait Gallery, London Born Harriet Hardy ( 1807-10-08 ) 8 October 1807 Walworth , England Died 3 November 1858 (1858-11-03) (aged 51) Avignon , France Resting place Cimetière Saint-Véran, Avignon Nationality English Occupation(s) Activist, philosopher Years active 1831–1858 Spouses John Taylor ​ ​ ( m.

1826; died 1849) ​ John Stuart Mill ​ ( m.

1851) ​ Children 3, including Helen Taylor Harriet Taylor Mill (born Harriet Hardy ; 8 October 1807 – 3 November 1858) [ 1 ] was an English philosopher and women's rights advocate. Her extant corpus of writing can be found in The Complete Works of Harriet Taylor Mill .

[ 2 ] Several pieces can also be found in The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill , [ 3 ] especially volume XXI.

Early life and first marriage [ edit ] Harriet Taylor Mill was born Harriet Hardy in 1807 in Walworth , south London, to parents Harriet and Thomas Hardy, a surgeon.

[ 4 ] She was educated at home and expressed an early interest in writing poetry as well as radical and "free thinking" ideas, leading to her association with the congregation of Unitarian "free thinker" Rev. William Fox .

[ 5 ] Taylor Mill married her first husband, John Taylor, in 1826 at the age of 18. Together, they had three children: Herbert, Algernon, and Helen Taylor . In 1830, Taylor Mill—then Harriet Taylor—met John Stuart Mill . How they met is the subject of some speculation, but some suggest it was planned by the leader of Taylor's Unitarian congregation.

[ 6 ] John Taylor invited Mill to dinner because of his wife's mutual interest in women's rights.

[ 7 ] Taylor was already not only writing poetry, but was interested in social reform, and had written a lengthy Life of William Caxton (which is, for the most part, a comprehensive history of the printed and written word) for the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge . Around the time she met Mill, she was, or began, also writing a series of unpublished pieces on women's rights, ethics, toleration and marriage.

[ 8 ] Her friendship with Mill quickly blossomed.

[ 4 ] Taylor was attracted to Mill, who treated her as an intellectual equal. Around eighteen months later, something made Taylor break off their friendship, [ 9 ] causing Mill to write her a passionate love letter in French (the only piece of correspondence surviving from either for this period of their relationship) in which he refuses to accept her 'eternal adieu', and, although saying 'her wish is his command', insists 'her path and mine are separated, she says; but they can, they must, meet again'.

[ 10 ] Evidently, she agreed, for they were soon closer than ever, exchanging a pair of lengthy essays, On Marriage , in 1833.

[ 11 ] In these essays, Taylor and Mill discuss the ethical questions of marriage, separation and divorce. Taylor insists that what needs to be done to 'rais[e] the condition of women' is 'to remove all interference with affection, or with anything which is, or which even might be supposed to be, demonstrative of affection'.

[ 12 ] She criticises the fact that 'women are educated for one single object, to gain their living by marrying'; that 'to be married is the object of their existence'; and 'that object being gained they do really cease to exist as to anything worth calling life or any useful purpose'.

[ 13 ] She also criticises the hypocrisy and unfairness of the fact that any girl who is seen as 'suitable' for marriage is – because only virgins are seen as suitable – by that very fact completely ignorant as to what marriage entails.

[ 14 ] She argues for rights to divorce, asking 'who would wish to have the person without the inclination?' [ 14 ] Going against the prevailing view that she was rather anti-sex, Taylor says that though 'certain it is that there is equality in nothing now – all the pleasure...being men's, and all the disagreeables and pains being women's', it is equally certain that 'pleasure would be infinitely heightened both in kind and degree by the perfect equality of the sexes'.

[ 13 ] She adds, 'Sex in its true and finest meaning, seems to be the way in which is manifested all that is highest, best and beautiful in the nature of human beings – none but poets have approached to the perception of the beauty of the material world – still less of the spiritual – and there never yet existed a poet except by the inspiration of that feeling which is the perception of beauty in all forms and by all means which are given us, as well as by sight'.

[ 14 ] She ends the essay by saying 'It is for you' (i.e. Mill) 'the most worthy apostle of all the loftiest virtues – to teach such as may be taught, that the higher the kind of enjoyment, the greater the degree', [ 15 ] and it is noteworthy that Mill is known, in his much-later essay Utilitarianism , for introducing the concept of differences in the quality of pleasures to a previously quantitative 'hedonic calculus' inherited from Jeremy Bentham .

Miniature portrait c.

1830 In late September, or early October 1833, Taylor's husband agreed to a trial separation. She went to Paris where, after what appears to have been an initial onset of cold feet regarding the possible repercussions of such a move for his, and her, reputation, Mill joined her.

[ 16 ] Despite evidently being extremely happy there with Mill, Taylor was conscience-stricken regarding her husband, keenly feeling the pain, and possible public humiliation, she was putting him through. Eventually, she decided to return to her husband in London, yet by the summer of 1834 she was living in her own house in Keston Heath.

[ 17 ] Mill visited Taylor frequently at her house in Keston Heath and travelled with her and sometimes her children (particularly in France) throughout the next two decades.

Marriage to Mill [ edit ] After John Taylor died in 1849, Taylor and Mill waited two years before marrying in 1851. Taylor was hesitant to create greater scandal than the pair already had. Mill's "Declaration on Marriage" reflected his model of 'perfect equality'.

[ 18 ] Taylor Mill wrote a number of essays, including several joint-authored pieces with Mill on domestic violence [ 19 ] and The Enfranchisement of Women , published in 1851.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] Own work [ edit ] Taylor Mill began publishing her works when she was pregnant with her third child, Helen (who also went on to be a campaigner for women's rights, particularly regarding education and the vote). She provided a variety of literature for the Unitarian journal Monthly Repository and the Society for the Distribution of Useful Knowledge.

[ 4 ] Though she made many contributions over the years, little of her own work was published under her own name during her lifetime. She was the co-author of several newspaper articles on domestic violence published anonymously in the Morning Chronicle , Daily News , and Sunday Times in the 1840s.

[ 23 ] She read and commented on all the material produced by John Stuart Mill, who called her a valuable contributor to much of his work, especially On Liberty , which he later dedicated to her when it was published in 1859, a year after her death.  She also contributed to Principles of Political Economy .

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Indeed, in his autobiography, Mill claimed Taylor Mill as the joint author of most of the books and articles published under his name. He added "when two persons have their thoughts and speculations completely in common it is of little consequence, in respect of the question of originality, which of them holds the pen". The debate about the nature and extent of her collaboration is ongoing.

[ 27 ] Few of Mill's friends were permitted to meet her.

Thomas and Jane Carlyle , who were allowed to make her acquaintance, did not form a favourable opinion of her abilities. Thomas Carlyle described her as "full of unwise intellect, asking and re-asking stupid questions", while Jane considered her "A peculiarly affected and empty body".

[ 28 ] A letter written by Mill in 1854 suggests the attribution of credit goes both ways for her and John Stuart Mill; "I shall never be satisfied unless you allow our best book, the book which is to come, to have our two names on the title page. It ought to be so with everything I publish, for the better half of it all is yours". There is speculation that this indicates some reluctance on her part, even after her husband's death. Certainly, he was very reluctant that her name be linked with Mill's in public during his lifetime, even in a suggested dedication to Principles of Political Economy in 1848. However, this letter adds to the evidence from Mill's Autobiography and textual analysis of their pieces, that the two worked as a pair for much of their work.

[ 29 ] Death and recognition [ edit ] Harriet Taylor Mill died in the Hotel d'Europe in Avignon , France, on 3 November 1858, after developing severe lung congestion. Jo Ellen Jacobs has argued that the cause of death may have been syphilis contracted from her first husband.

[ 30 ] However, this posthumous diagnosis is contested.

Harriet Taylor Mill's grave in Avignon Upon her death, John Stuart Mill wrote: Were I but capable of interpreting to the world one half the great thoughts and noble feelings which are buried in her grave, I should be the medium of a greater benefit to it, than is ever likely to arise from anything that I can write, unprompted and unassisted by her all but unrivalled wisdom.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] At the Berlin School of Economics and Law, the Harriet Taylor Mill Institute for Economics and Gender Studies, founded in 2001, was named after her. She was included as one of the Philosopher Queens in the book of that name in 2020.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] History of feminism List of suffragists and suffragettes Women's suffrage in the United Kingdom References [ edit ] ^ Robson, Ann P. "Mill [née Hardy; other married name Taylor], Harriet".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/38051 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ See Mill, Harriet Taylor (1998), Jacobs, Jo Ellen (ed.), The Complete Works of Harriet Taylor Mill (1 ed.), Bloomington, Indiana: University of Indiana Press, ISBN 0253333938 , retrieved 14 May 2015 ^ "Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, in 33 vols. | Online Library of Liberty" .

oll.libertyfund.org . Retrieved 16 October 2023 .

^ a b c "Introduction." The Complete Works of Harriet Taylor Mill, by Jo Ellen Jacobs and Paula Harms Payne, Indiana University Press, 1998.

^ "History – Historic Figures: Harriet Taylor (1807–1858)" . BBC . Retrieved 15 March 2018 .

^ Miller, Dale E. (2015). "Harriet Taylor Mill". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2015 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Jo Ellen Jacobs, 'Chronology', The Complete Works of Harriet Taylor Mill, p.xlii ^ "Chronology" The Complete Works of Harriet Taylor Mill, by Jo Ellen Jacobs, Indiana University Press, 1998 ^ Jo Ellen Jacobs, 'Chronology', p.xlii ^ Mill, Early Correspondence, CWXII, p.114. 'Sa route et la mienne sont s6par6es, elle l'a dit: mais elles peuvent, elles doivent, se rencontrer' ^ The date is not certain. Watermarks date to 1831 and 1832. However, Taylor quotes a poem by Tennyson ("Eleanore") which was only published in 1833.

^ Harriet Taylor, 'On Marriage', Complete Works of Harriet Taylor Mill, p. 21 ^ a b Taylor, 'On Marriage', p. 22 ^ a b c Taylor, 'On Marriage', p. 23 ^ Taylor, 'On Marriage', p. 24 ^ See Mill's letters to Thomas Carlyle, and Taylor's letters to him.  Mill, CW XII, pp. 180–185. The Voice of Harriet Taylor Mill. pp. 53–54.

^ The Voice of Harriet Taylor Mill, by Jo Ellen Jacobs, Indiana University Press, 2002, p 61 ^ "Being about, if I am so happy as to obtain her consent, to enter into the marriage relation with the only woman I have ever known, with whom I would have entered into that state; & the whole character of the marriage relation as constituted by law being such as both she and I entirely & conscientiously disapprove, for this amongst other reasons, that it confers upon one of the parties to the contract, legal power & control over the person, property, & freedom of action of the other party, independent of her own wishes and will; I, having no means of legally divesting myself of these odious powers (as I most assuredly would do if an engagement to that effect could be made legally binding on me) feel it my duty to put on record a formal protest against the existing law of marriage, in so far as conferring such powers; and a solemn promise never in any case or under any circumstances to use them. And in the event of marriage between Mrs. Taylor and me I declare it to be my will and intention, & the condition of the engagement between us, that she retains in all respects whatever the same absolute freedom of action, & freedom of disposal of herself and of all that does or may at any time belong to her, as if no such marriage had taken place; and I absolutely disclaim & repudiate all pretension to have acquired any rights whatever by virtue of such marriage. 	6th March 1851	J.S.Mill",The Voice of Harriet Taylor Mill, pp. 166–167.

^ The Complete Works of Harriet Taylor Mill Chapter 4.

^ The Complete Works of Harriet Taylor Mill.  pp. 51–73.

^ Tong, Rosemarie (2009).

Feminist Thought: A More Comprehensive Introduction . Westview Press (Perseus Books). p. 17.

ISBN 978-0-8133-4375-4 .

^ Mill, Mrs. John Stuart (1851).

The Enfranchisement of Women (July 1851 ed.). London: Westminster & Foreign Quarterly Review. p. 27 . Retrieved 4 June 2014 .

^ The Complete Works of Harriet Taylor Mill, pp. 75–131.

^ The Voice of Harriet Taylor Mill, pp. 195–251 ^ "Harriet Taylor" .

BBC History, Historic Figures .

BBC .

^ Mill, John Stuart (1873).

Autobiography (1873 first ed.). London: Longmans, Green, Reader & Dyer. pp.

251– 252.

^ "Search (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)" .

^ "Romance and Socialism in J. S. Mill" . 20 May 2017.

^ Mill, John Stuart. Autobiography. Henry Holt and Co.

^ The Voice of Harriet Taylor Mill, pp. 134–146 ^ Mill, John Stuart (1859).

On Liberty (1859 first ed.). London: John W. Parker. p. 6.

^ Harriet Mill Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Further reading [ edit ] Jacobs, Jo-Ellen (2002) The Voice of Harriet Taylor Mill (Indiana University Press).

Jacobs, Jo-Ellen (1994). 'The Lot of Gifted Ladies is Hard': A Study of Harriet Taylor Mill Criticism'.

Hypatia 9/3, 132-172.

McCabe, Helen (2020) 'Harriet Taylor' in Buxton, Rebecca and Whiting, Lisa (Ed) The Philosopher Queens (Unbound).

McCabe, Helen (2020), "Political … civil and domestic slavery": Harriet Taylor Mill and Anna Doyle Wheeler on marriage, servitude, and socialism'.

British Journal for the History of Philosophy published online 4 May 2020.

McCabe, Helen (2019) 'Harriet Taylor'.

In: EILEEN HUNT BOTTING, SANDRINE BERGES and ALAN COFFEE, eds., The Wollstonecraftian Mind Routledge. 248-26.

Rossi, Alice S. (1970).

Sentiment and Intellect:  The Story of John Stuart Mill and Harriet Taylor Mill , in Rossi, Alice S. (Ed), Essays on Sex Equality . The University of Chicago Press.

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original works by or about: Harriet Taylor Mill Wikiquote has quotations related to Harriet Taylor Mill .

Harriet Taylor Mill Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry .

Catalogue of Harriet Taylor Mill's correspondence and other papers at the Archives Division of the London School of Economics .

Harriet Taylor Mill Institute for Economics and Gender Studies in Berlin Archived 5 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine v t e Liberal feminism Issues Gender equality Women's suffrage Female education Right to work Violence against women Anti-discrimination law Sexism Gender pay gap and equal pay for equal work Glass ceiling Women in development Feminist foreign policy LGBT+ rights Variants Liberal state feminism Equality feminism Social feminism Equity feminism Difference feminism Individualist feminism Groups Present German Association of Female Citizens (1865) Danish Women's Society (1871) Norwegian Association for Women's Rights (1884) Fredrika Bremer Association (1884) International Council of Women (1888) National Council of Women of the United States (1888) Naisasialiitto Unioni (1892) International Alliance of Women (1904) Icelandic Women's Rights Association (1907) Women's International League for Peace and Freedom (1915) League of Women Voters (1920) All India Women's Conference (1927) League of Women Voters of Japan (1946) Deutscher Frauenring (1949) All Pakistan Women's Association (1949) German Women's Council (1951) Fawcett Society (1953) National Organization for Women (1966) National Women's Political Caucus (1971) UN Women (2010) Former Seneca Falls Convention (1848) National Women's Rights Convention (1850) National Society for Women's Suffrage (1867) London National Society for Women's Suffrage (1867) National Woman Suffrage Association (1869) American Woman Suffrage Association (1869) National American Woman Suffrage Association (1890) Bund Deutscher Frauenvereine (1894) National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (1897) People Mary Wollstonecraft Judith Sargent Murray John Stuart Mill Harriet Taylor Mill Susan B. Anthony Elizabeth Cady Stanton Millicent Fawcett Na Hye-sok Gina Krog Hagbart Berner Fredrikke Marie Qvam Carrie Chapman Catt Margery Corbett Ashby Hanna Rydh Margarete Bonnevie Eva Kolstad Ra'ana Liaquat Ali Khan Betty Friedan Hillary Clinton Symbolism Sunflower Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain 2 Netherlands Norway Chile Sweden Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harriet_Taylor_Mill&oldid=1306034608 " Categories : 1807 births 1858 deaths 19th-century English people 19th-century English philosophers 19th-century English women writers English women philosophers English feminist writers English Unitarians People from Walworth Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Pages using cite ODNB with id parameter Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from August 2014 Use dmy dates from October 2023 Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 14:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harriet Taylor Mill 31 languages Add topic

