Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Status Toggle Status subsection 2.1 Decreolisation 3 Dialects Toggle Dialects subsection 3.1 Post-creole contiuum 3.2 Geographic dialects 3.3 Sociolects 3.4 Creolisation 4 Phonology Toggle Phonology subsection 4.1 Phonotactics 5 Orthography 6 Morphology and syntax Toggle Morphology and syntax subsection 6.1 Parts of speech 6.2 Pronouns 6.3 Demonstratives 6.4 Suffixes 6.5 Word order 6.6 Reduplication 7 Lexicon 8 Media Toggle Media subsection 8.1 Bible translation 9 Sample text 10 Notes 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Australian Kriol 9 languages Deutsch Eesti Español Français 한국어 Nordfriisk Piemontèis Português Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Australian Kriol language ) Creole language developed in Australia from an English-pidgin Australian Kriol Native to Australia Region Roper River , Katherine areas, Ngukurr , Northern Territory ; Kimberley , Western Australia ; Gulf Country , Lower Cape York Peninsula , Queensland Ethnicity Aboriginal Australians Native speakers 7,500 (2021 census) [ 1 ] L2 speakers : 10,000 (1991) [ 2 ] Language family English Creole Pacific Australian Kriol Early forms Port Jackson Pidgin English Northern Territory Pidgin English Dialects Roper River Kriol Barunga Kriol Barkly Kriol Fitzroy Valley Kriol Daly River Kriol Halls Creek Belyuen Turkey Creek-Wyndham-Kununurra Barkley Tableland Victoria River?

Writing system Kriol Alphabet based on the English Alphabet Language codes ISO 639-3 rop Glottolog krio1252 AIATSIS [ 3 ] P1 Linguasphere 52-ABB-ca (varieties: 52-ABB-caa to -caf Australian Kriol , also known as Roper River Kriol, Fitzroy Valley Kriol, Australian Creole, Northern Australian Creole or Aboriginal English , [ 4 ] is an English-based creole language that developed from a pidgin used initially in the region of Sydney and Newcastle in New South Wales , Australia, in the early days of European colonisation . Later, it was spoken by groups further west and north. The pidgin died out in most parts of the country, except in the Northern Territory , where the contact between European settlers, Chinese people and other Asian groups, and the Aboriginal Australians in the northern regions has maintained a vibrant use of the language, which is spoken by about 30,000 people. Despite its similarities to English in vocabulary, it has a distinct syntactic structure and grammar . It is a language in its own right and is distinct from Torres Strait Creole .

History [ edit ] The first records of the progenitor to Kriol, a pidgin called Port Jackson Pidgin English (PJPE), are found from the 1780s, with the pidgin being used for communication between the white settlers around Port Jackson and the local indigenous population.

[ 5 ] During that period, relations between the native Australians and Europeans were strained and often violent. Aboriginal people fiercely defended their lands. However, the control of lands was eventually seized by the settlers when a cattle company acquired much of the area. The settlers became more determined to take full control of the land from the native people and carried out a campaign to do so.

[ 6 ] European settlement in the Northern Territory was attempted over a period of about forty years. Settlement finally succeeded in 1870 with the founding of Darwin , and an influx of English and Chinese speakers followed. To communicate between these two groups and the local Aboriginal people, many pidgins developed throughout the territory based on PJPE. By 1900, PJPE had developed into Northern Territory Pidgin English (NTPE), which was widespread and well understood.

[ 7 ] Then, by 1908, NTPE would creolise into Australian Kriol, starting first in the Roper River Mission . One reason for this was the resettlements and land seizures that nearly annihilated the indigenous population , as they created drastic social change. Another reason was that the Anglican mission had between 70-200 people at any given times from eight different aboriginal ethnic groups who spoke different native languages. Although adult members of these groups were multilingual because of frequent meetings and ceremonies, the children communicated almost entirely in NTPE, except for close friends and family with whom they would have shared a home language . But NTPE would not have been sufficient for communication so the children naturally expanded the pidgin until in creolised into Australian Kriol. Children from these communities disseminated English features throughout their communities. Although the relations between the missionaries and Aboriginal people were friendly, the missionaries were not responsible for the development of Kriol. In fact, they tried to introduce Standard English as the official language for the mission, which the Aboriginal children used in class and with the missionaries, but Kriol still flourished.

[ 8 ] Not all speakers of NTPE would switch over to Australian Kriol though as many after 1908 continued to speak NTPE.

[ 8 ] Kriol gradually spread and this spread was significantly sped up by policy changes made after World War 2 as well as changes caused directly by World War 2.

[ 9 ] This process of creolisation entailed a massive increase in the lexicon as well as a complexification of the grammar of the language.

[ 7 ] When NTPE speaking communities creolised not all NTPE speakers would start speaking Kriol for those in more peripheral parts of the Kriol speaking area their NTPE was heavily influenced by English so when it creolised it became a dialect of Australian Aboriginal English heavily influenced by Kriol.

[ 9 ] Kriol was not recognised as a language until the 1970s, as it was regarded as a dialect of English.

A Kriol orthography began development in 1973, shortly after the Australian Government's announcement of a trilingual education policy in English, Kriol, and Aboriginal languages. Though a small amount of work had been done in 1967 by Mary Harris and Margaret Sharpe their work had not been built on and Kriol Orthography has little influence from their work. From 1973 to 1975 linguists John Sandefur and Sharpe worked on the orthography with only limited involvement from native speakers of Kriol. By mid 1976 Kriol speakers from a Ngukurr school had become involved in the project, ensuring the orthography would work for both the Bamyili and Ngukurr dialects, as at the time these two dialects were the most known amongst the wider Australian establishment. By November 1976 the orthography was complete and was "launched" with a 4 week Kriol writers course in Bamyili and Ngukurr schools.

[ 10 ] In her first speech in April 2013, Josie Farrer spoke in Kriol and Gija , marking the first ever use of an indigenous language in the Western Australian Parliament .

[ 6 ] Status [ edit ] The Kriol language, unlike many other Aboriginal languages, remains healthy, with most of its speakers under 30 years old. About 99% of Kriol speakers are Australian Aboriginals, while only 0.8% belong to other groups, indicating that Kriol functions primarily as an in-group language. While Kriol is predominantly spoken rather than written, with generally low literacy rates among its speakers, various organisations and initiatives are working to promote Kriol literacy and media presence through education, original content creation and translations of existing works.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Views on the Kriol language vary widely. Some dispute its status as a distinct language, dismissing it as either English or poorly spoken English. Others see it as a threat to traditional Aboriginal languages, while many embrace and actively support it. Government support remains limited, with only two bilingual programs ever established; those being in Barunga and Ngukurr . Although the Barunga program has since closed, both programs successfully incorporated Kriol as both a teaching medium and a subject of study.

[ 12 ] [ 11 ] [ 13 ] Code switching between Kriol and English, as well as between Light and Heavy Kriol, is common practice. Light Kriol and English are typically used in formal settings, while Heavy Kriol is preferred among Aboriginal people and in casual situations, similar to how speakers switch between formal and informal English.

[ 10 ] Decreolisation [ edit ] In areas bordering Kriol-speaking regions, a process of decreolisation has occurred, with speakers shifting toward Australian Aboriginal English while retaining some Kriol features. This trend is most noticeable among mixed-race Aboriginal Australians living in larger towns with significant European populations. Historically, widespread discrimination led many to suppress their Aboriginal heritage and view Kriol as incorrect English that needed to be eliminated. These factors, combined with constant exposure to English, led to a gradual language shift. While racism has diminished, continued contact with English means that in some communities, although the Aboriginal population can speak Kriol, Aboriginal English remains the primary language for interaction with European-descent Australians and others.

[ 9 ] Another form of decreolisation occurs when early Kriol speakers relocate to areas where Kriol is not used. Without regular exposure to Kriol and surrounded by English speakers, their language would shift toward English.

[ 9 ] However, the extent of decreolisation poses no significant threat to Kriol. With a high birthrate among Kriol speakers and decreolisation affecting only a small minority in approximately 6 out of 250 Kriol-speaking communities, the language maintains its vitality.

[ 9 ] Dialects [ edit ] Post-creole contiuum [ edit ] Kriol exists along a post-creole continuum , with dialects ranging from those closer to Australian Aboriginal English to those more distinct from it. Heavy Kriol, which differs more substantially from English, incorporates more words from Australian Aboriginal languages and features more divergent word order and phonology . Light Kriol, on the other hand, maintains more English-like characteristics, including English suffixes, similar phonology and a higher proportion of English vocabulary.

[ 14 ] Between these two extremes lies a spectrum of mesolects, representing varying degrees of difference from standard English.

[ 10 ] Light vs Heavy Kriol Light Kriol Heavy Kriol English hed gabarra head graul gula growl/tell off daib dirwu dive hosis hojij horses The choice between Light and Heavy Kriol often reflects speakers' level of integration into mainstream Anglo-Australian society. Indigenous Australians who are more integrated into broader society typically use Light Kriol, while those who maintain stronger traditional ties and often speak an Indigenous Australian language as their first language tend to use Heavy Kriol.

[ 10 ] Mutual intelligibility between Kriol and English is limited, though it varies depending on the dialect. While Light Kriol is more comprehensible to English speakers than Heavy Kriol, even then understanding is superficial. English speakers may grasp the general meaning of Kriol speech but struggle to understand specific details.

[ 10 ] Geographic dialects [ edit ] Aside from this acrolectic spectrum, Australian Kriol encompasses several geographic dialects, organised in a hierarchy of regional and local variations. Major regional dialects are centred around Roper River , Barunga , Fitzroy Valley , Halls Creek , Daly River , Belyuen , Turkey Creek - Wyndham - Kununurra area and the Barkly Tableland , with possible distinct dialects around the Victoria River . Each regional dialect further subdivides into local dialects, typically associated with individual settlements, though these smaller variations remain largely unstudied.

[ 9 ] These dialects differ in their phonology, grammar and lexicon . A general pattern emerges: dialects in more populated, accessible areas tend toward Light Kriol, showing stronger English influence, while those in more isolated, less populated regions typically align with Heavy Kriol. Each dialect community usually descends from speakers of a particular Indigenous language, leading to the incorporation of vocabulary from that language. While speakers of other dialects can understand these distinct vocabulary items, they typically do not use them themselves.

[ 9 ] Among these geographic variations, the dialects of the Roper River and Barunga regions have received the most thorough documentation and study.

[ 15 ] Sociolects [ edit ] Australian Kriol also exhibits social dialects or sociolects. One notable variety is strit tok (street talk), a youth slang often criticised by traditional speakers as a corruption of "proper" Kriol. Another variant is Borunga Kriol, spoken by non-native Kriol speakers attempting to communicate with Kriol speakers. Borunga Kriol speakers fall into two groups: language learners who produce an "English-Kriol interlanguage " while acquiring the language, and those who intentionally speak a simplified, incorrect version of English in an attempt to mimic Kriol. This latter form, known as "Mock Kriol", bears little resemblance to authentic Kriol and represents an inaccurate imitation of the language.

[ 9 ] Creolisation [ edit ] Two distinct creole languages have also emerged from contact between Kriol and other Aboriginal languages.

Gurndji Creole developed in the Victoria River District through extensive code-switching between Kriol and Gurindji .

[ 16 ] Similarly, Light Warlpiri emerged in the town of Lajamanu through rapid code-switching between Kriol, English and Warlpiri .

[ 17 ] Phonology [ edit ] Consonants [ a ] [ 11 ] Bilabial Labiodental Interdental Alveolar Retroflex Palatal Labiovelar Velar Glottal Plosive Voiced b t̪ d ɖ c g Voiceless p t ʈ k Fricative f s ʃ h Nasal m n ɳ ɲ ŋ Lateral l ɭ ʎ Trill / Tap r Approximant ɻ j w Vowels [ a ] [ 10 ] Front Central Back Close i ɪ u Mid ɛ ə o Open æ a ä ɔ Austral Kriol also has 7 diphthongs .

[ 10 ] Phonotactics [ edit ] Australian Kriol phonotactics dictates that consonant clusters at the start of words must be a plosive followed by a liquid, rhotic or glide consonant, the only exception is an alveolar fricative followed by a plosive. Consonant clusters at the end of words are nonexistent except for the clusters /lb/ and /ks/.

[ 11 ] Orthography [ edit ] The Kriol alphabet is based on the English alphabet , but varies not only in what letters and digraphs are used, but also in the rules for said letters and digraphs. Each phoneme in Kriol can only be spelled one way, unlike in English orthography , where several different spellings can be used to make the same sound. Kriol, unlike English, also uses a phonetic orthography in which words are spelled to match how they sound.

[ 10 ] The Kriol alphabet contains 21 letters, 11 consonant digraphs , 5 vowel digraphs and 5 punctuation marks .

[ 10 ] Letters : A , B , D , E , F , G , H , I , J , K , L , M , N , O , Q , R , S , T , U , W , Y Consonant Digraphs : Ly , Ng , Ny , Rd , Rl , Rn , Rr , Rt , Sh , Th , Tj Vowel Digraphs : Ai , Au , Ei , Oi , Ou Punctuation Marks : Period (.), Comma (,), Question mark (?), Exclamation mark (!), Quotation marks (" ") Morphology and syntax [ edit ] As a general rule, the grammar of Kriol is a simplified version of that found in English , meaning that it is analytic , with words generally having only one form and additional meaning derived not from changing words but from word order and added new words.

[ 18 ] Parts of speech [ edit ] The parts of speech which Australian Kriol has are: verbs , modals , tense markers , adverbs , nouns , pronouns , adjectives , demonstratives , quantifiers , articles , plural markers , prepositions , and particles .

[ 14 ] Pronouns [ edit ] Kriol pronouns differentiate between different between first , second and third person , as well as between singular, plural , and dual plural inclusive and exclusive pronouns first person. The language also differentiates between subject , object , independent pronoun, and adnominal possessive . There are also reflexive and reciprocal pronouns .

[ 11 ] Pronouns of Australian Kriol [ a ] [ 11 ] Subject Object Independent pronoun Adnominal Possessive 1st Person Singular ai, mi mi mi main, mi, mai Dual Inclusive yunmi, minyu, wi yunmi yunmi yunmi Exclusive min(du)bala, wi min(du)bala, as min(du)bala min(du)bala Plural Inclusive minolabat, wilat, wi as, minolabat as, minolabat as, minolabat Exclusive mibala, wi, mela(bat) mibala, as, mela(bat) mibala, mela(bat) mibala, mela(bat) 2nd Person Singular yu yu yu yu, yus Dual yundubala yundubala yundubala yundubala Plural yubala, yumob yubala, yumob yubala, yumob yubala, yumob 3rd Person Singular im ~ i ~ hi im im im, is Dual dubala dubala dubala dubala Plural olabat, ol, dei olabat, ol, dei olabat, ol, dei olabat, ol, dei Reflexive mijelp, jelp Reciprocal gija, mijelp, jelp Demonstratives [ edit ] Pronomial Adnomial Adverbial Locative Adverbial Directional Proximal Singular dijan ~ diswan dij ~ dis hiya dijei Plural dislot ~ dislat dislot ~ dislat Distal Singular tharran ~ jarran ~ jadan that ~ jet ~ det theya ~ jeya ~ deya tharrei Plural thatlot ~ jatlot ~ jatlat thatlot ~ jatlot ~ jatlat [ 11 ] Suffixes [ edit ] Various types of words in Kriol have one or more suffixes associated with them with certain suffixes being used for several different types of words.

[ 14 ] Types of non spatial suffixes [ 14 ] [ 19 ] Suffix Example English Adjective -wan nogud wan bad -bala granggi bala crazy Progressive Verbs -bat lukinat bat Watching Quantifier -bala sam bala some Transitive verbs -im Ir im mi na listen to me In Australian Kriol, many spatial words from English have been transformed into suffixes attached to verbs they interact with. The specific suffixes vary between dialects but remain mostly similar.

[ 18 ] Spacial suffixes Kriol suffix translation example translation an on putim an put on ap up klaim ap climb up (a)ran around luk aran look around (a)wei away ran awei run away at out, at kam at come out bek back ran bek run back dan down/over nakim dan knock over oba/ova over guw oba go over of/op/ap off gid of get off These spacial suffixes and the non spacial suffixes can be combined in words like pikimap (pick up) which contains the suffixes im and ap.

[ 14 ] Word order [ edit ] Kriol uses an SVO word order exclusively. In Kriol the order of possessor and possessum varies, with it being evenly split between possessor possessum and possessum possessor.

[ 18 ] Kriol [ 10 ] English [ 10 ] Possessor Possessum blanga olgamen daga the woman's food Possessum Posessor mani blanga mi money of mine In Kriol word order is evenly split between verb object adverb and Adverb verb object.

[ 18 ] Word order is used over inflections or subject object affixation or verbs to specify meaning.

[ 20 ] Reduplication [ edit ] In Kriol, reduplication can be used both on the root of a verb and on the entire verb to make the verb a progressive verb.

[ 14 ] Word being reduplicated English Word when reduplicated English Gobek Return Gobekgobek Returning Rid Read Ridridbat Reading Lexicon [ edit ] The primary contributing language of Kriol is English, but it has received and continues to receive influence from Chinese Pidgin English , Alawa , Marra , Ngalakgan , Wandarrang , Mangarrayi , Ngandi , Nunggubuyu , Jawoyn , Dalabon , Rembarrnga , Barunga , Jaminjung , Ngarinyman , Wardaman , Walmatjari , Djaru , Miriwoong and Gija .

[ 11 ] There are a significant number of loanwords from Australian Aboriginal languages in Australian Kriol. These words most frequently come from semantic domains which were of particular significance to Aboriginal Australians such as kinship , ceremony and nature or were primarily discussed among the family and language group such as familial terms . Examples of these include the words lambarra (father in law), corroboree ( sacred dance ) and jaojao ( water lily stalk).

[ 8 ] New words have often been coined to fill lexical gaps instead of borrowing from Aboriginal languages. For example the Kriol word mailawik comes from the English word week and the Aboriginal morpheme maila (poor), and thus literally means "poor week ".

It was used to refer to the week in the fortnightly payment system in which the employee would not be paid, which is referred to "off pay week" in Australian English .

[ 8 ] Words were also sometimes semantically changed or expanded to fill new meanings.

[ 8 ] Semantic Expansion in Kriol Original Term Kriol term Added definition Sugar Bag jugabeg Wild Honey Wire Waya Three pronged fishing spear made of fencing wire find baindim conceive Media [ edit ] Located at the Museum of the Bible , a copy of the Australian Kriol Bible ( Holi Baibul ) is on display.

Many famous pieces of media such Shakespeare and Waltzing Matilda have been translated into Kriol, and many books have been published in Kriol.

ABC and several other organizations currently make news in Kriol. Online there are several videos and texts available in Kriol, as well as resources for learning the language. There is also an Australian Kriol Wikipedia currently on the Wikimedia Incubator .

Bible translation [ edit ] On 5 May 2007, the first complete edition of the Bible in the Kriol language was launched at Katherine in the Northern Territory. Translation took over 29 years. It was undertaken by a team of native Kriol speakers led by Rev. Canon Gumbuli Wurrumara and specialists from the Society for Australian Indigenous Languages.

The Kriol Bible is the first complete edition of the Bible in any Indigenous Australian language. The publication was a joint venture of The Bible Society, Lutheran Bible Translators, The Church Missionary Society , the Anglican church , Wycliffe Bible Translators , and the Australian Society of Indigenous Languages.

[ 21 ] Sample text [ edit ] Kriol [ 22 ] [ 13 ] English [ 23 ] [ 13 ] [ Genesis 1:1-2] Orait, longtaim wen God bin stat meigimbat ebrijing, nomo enijing bin jidan. Imbin jis eniwei, nomo garram enijing. Oni strongbala woda bin goran goran ebriwei, en imbin brabli dakbala, en det Spirit blanga God bin mubabat ontop langa det woda.

[ Genesis 1:1-2] In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. Now the earth was formless and empty, darkness was over the surface of the deep, and the Spirit of God was hovering over the waters.

Wen ola bigini dun Kriol la skul, im album alabat jidan strongbala. La run 33 alabat bin dum profail, bla dalim wi "hu yu?". La Rum 12, alabat bin drodrobat alabat femili en raidimdan wani dei gulum alabat gada Kriol Our Kriol programs help students feel strong about themselves. In Room 33, students have been completing Kriol profiles about themselves while in Room 12, students did some great family portraits with all the labels in Kriol.

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Some are exclusive to certain dialects References [ edit ] ^ Australian Bureau of Statistics (2021).

"Cultural diversity: Census" . Retrieved 13 October 2022 .

^ Australian Kriol at Ethnologue (25th ed., 2022) ^ P1 Australian Kriol at the Australian Indigenous Languages Database, Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies ^ The Atlas of Pidgin and Creole Language Structures .

Oxford .

^ Sharpe, Margret C.

Kriol - An Australian Language Resource . p. 178.

^ a b Studies, Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander (5 August 2024).

"Indigenous languages in Australian parliaments" .

aiatsis.gov.au . Retrieved 8 October 2024 .

^ a b Harris, John W. (1 January 1988).

"Northern Territory Pidgin English: A Lexical Study" .

English World-Wide .

9 (1): 77– 99.

doi : 10.1075/eww.9.1.06har .

ISSN 0172-8865 .

^ a b c d e Harris, John W. (1986).

Northern Territory pidgins and the origin of Kriol . Internet Archive. Canberra, A.C.T., Australia : Dept. of Linguistics, Research School of Pacific Studies, Australian National University. pp. 248, 302, 309– 311, 322.

ISBN 978-0-85883-334-0 .

^ a b c d e f g h Sandefur, John (1986).

Kriol of Northern Australia A Language Coming of Age (10 ed.).

Summer Institute of Linguistics Australian Aborigines Branch Darwin. pp.

14– 15, 46– 48, 56– 59.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Sandefur, John R. (1984).

Papers on Kriol: The writing system and a resource guide . Summer Institute of Linguistics, Australian Aborigines Branch. pp. 5, 32, 49– 50, 69, 74– 75, 155– 156.

ISBN 0-86892-297-8 .

^ a b c d e f g h "APiCS Online – Survey chapter: Kriol" .

apics-online.info . Retrieved 26 June 2024 .

^ a b "2021 Census: Kriol a growing language – Meigim Kriol Strongbala" .

meigimkriolstrongbala.org.au/en_au/ . Retrieved 15 August 2024 .

^ a b c "While many Indigenous languages are disappearing, one has more speakers than ever" .

SBS News . Retrieved 15 August 2024 .

^ a b c d e f Nicholls, Sophie (2009).

Referring Expressions and Referential Practice in Roper Kriol (Northern Territory, Australia) . pp.

22– 28.

^ Schultze-Berndt, Eva; Angelo, Denise (2013), "Kriol structure dataset" , Atlas of Pidgin and Creole Language Structures Online , Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology , retrieved 17 August 2024 ^ "UQ eSpace" .

espace.library.uq.edu.au . Retrieved 17 August 2024 .

^ "A New Language Spoken By Just 350 People Has Evolved In Australia's Outback" .

IFLScience . 25 January 2024 . Retrieved 15 September 2024 .

^ a b c d "APiCS Online –" .

apics-online.info . Retrieved 17 August 2024 .

^ Hudson, Joyce (July 1985).

Grammatical and Sematic Aspects of Fitzroy Valley Kriol . p. 35.

^ Margaret, Sharpe (1978).

Papers in Pidgin and Creole Linguistics (4th ed.). pp.

182– 185.

^ Carroll, Peter J. 2004. From the beginning to Proverbs.

The Bible Translator 55.4: 491–497.

^ "The Holy Bible in the Kriol language of Australia" (PDF) .

ebible.org .

^ "Bible Gateway passage: Genesis 1:1-2 - New International Version" .

Bible Gateway . Retrieved 24 June 2024 .

Harris, John (1993) "Losing and gaining a language: the story of Kriol in the Northern Territory" in Walsh, M and Yallop, C (eds), Language and Culture in Aboriginal Australia , Aboriginal Studies Press, Canberra.

External links [ edit ] Kriol test of Wikipedia at Wikimedia Incubator Australian Kriol repository of Wikisource , the free library Meigim Kriol Strongbala Bilingual Kriol-English website providing news and information on Kriol.

Ngukurr Community site for the main Aboriginal Community producing Kriol language materials.

Kriol language resources Kriol-English Dictionary Retrieved 25 December 2014.

Crittenden, Stephen (2 May 2007).

"First complete Bible translation in an indigenous language" .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 25 December 2014 .

The Kriol Bible, full text Retrieved 13 January 2020.

Kriol materials from the Barunga bilingual program at the Living Archive of Aboriginal Languages [ permanent dead link ] Roper Gulf Regional Council Retrieved 25 December 2014.

v t e Languages of Australia English varieties Australian Western Australian South Australian Australian Aboriginal Torres Strait Major Indigenous languages Anindilyakwa Arrernte Burarra Kalaw Lagaw Ya Murrinh Patha Tiwi Walmajarri Warlpiri Warumungu Western Desert Luritja Pintupi Pitjantjatjara Yolŋu Matha Dhuwal Djambarrpuyngu Language families Bunuban Daly (5 families) Darwin Region ? (3 families/isolates) Garrwan Giimbiyu Iwaidjan Jarrakan Macro-Gunwinyguan ? (5-6 families/isolates) Marrku–Wurrugu ?

Mirndi Nyulnyulan Pama–Nyungan Tangkic Tasmanian (4 families?) Tiwi Worrorran Yangmanic (incl.

Wagiman )?

Pidgins , creoles and mixed languages Angloromani Broome Pearling Lugger Pidgin Cocos Malay Gurindji Kriol Kriol Light Warlpiri Norfuk Port Jackson Pidgin English Queensland Kanaka English South Australian Pidgin English Torres Strait Creole Major immigrant languages Arabic Chinese Cantonese Mandarin Greek Hindi Italian Korean Maltese Nepali Punjabi Spanish Tagalog Urdu Vietnamese Major foreign languages Arabic Chinese French German Greek Indonesian Italian Japanese Spanish Sign languages Auslan Australian Aboriginal Indigenous Sign Language Australian Irish Sign Language Aboriginal Australians Indigenous Australians v t e English-based creole languages Africa Krio (Sierra Leone) Aku (The Gambia) Merico West Africa Cameroon Ghana Liberia Nigeria Pichinglis (Equatorial Guinea) Caribbean Eastern Antigua and Barbuda Anguilla Montserrat Saint Kitts Barbados Grenada Gullah (United States) Afro-Seminole Creole (United States) Guyana Kwinti (Suriname) Ndyuka (French Guiana and Suriname) Aluku (French Guiana and Suriname) Saramaccan (French Guiana and Suriname; English and Portuguese based) Matawai (Suriname) Sranan Tongo (Suriname) Tobago Trinidad Saint Vincent Virgin Islands Western Bahamas Belize Jamaican Maroon Jamaican Patois Bocas del Toro (Panama) Limonese Creole (Costa Rica) Miskito Coast (Nicaragua) Rama Cay (Nicaragua) San Andrés–Providencia (Colombia) Turks and Caicos Asia and the Pacific Australian Aborginal Bonin Islands Hawaiian Pidgin Malaysia Melanesia Bislama (Vanuatu) Pijin (Solomon Islands) Tok Pisin (Papua New Guinea) Ngatikese Creole (Micronesia) Pitcairn - Norfolk Singapore Torres Strait Islands Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐jmnpp
Cached time: 20250817050911
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.710 seconds
Real time usage: 0.903 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5095/1000000
Revision size: 36582/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 110257/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5852/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 108780/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.422/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20424262/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  728.784      1 -total
 30.60%  223.041      2 Template:Reflist
 15.78%  114.974     10 Template:Cite_web
 14.33%  104.433      4 Template:Navbox
 13.61%   99.180      1 Template:Languages_of_Australia
 13.58%   99.004      1 Template:Infobox_language
 12.39%   90.290      2 Template:Lang
 11.21%   81.707      1 Template:Infobox
  9.55%   69.566      1 Template:Short_description
  7.52%   54.802      8 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2907581:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817050911 and revision id 1305811472. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Australian_Kriol&oldid=1305811472 " Categories : English-based pidgins and creoles of Australia Indigenous Australian languages in the Northern Territory Subject–verb–object languages Languages attested from the 1900s Pidgins and creoles of Australia Non-Pama-Nyungan languages Indigenous Australian languages in Western Australia Indigenous Australian languages in Queensland Hidden categories: Language articles citing Ethnologue 25 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Australian English from May 2011 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from June 2020 Language articles with Linguasphere code ISO language articles citing sources other than Ethnologue Articles containing Australian Kriol-language text All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 06:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Australian Kriol 9 languages Add topic

