Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Africa Toggle Africa subsection 1.1 Great Lakes of Africa 1.2 Lists by country 1.2.1 Algeria 1.2.2 Angola 1.2.3 Benin 1.2.4 Botswana 1.2.5 Burkina Faso 1.2.6 Cameroon 1.2.7 Cape Verde 1.2.8 Central African Republic 1.2.9 Chad 1.2.10 Comoros 1.2.11 Democratic Republic of the Congo 1.2.12 Republic of the Congo 1.2.13 Djibouti 1.2.14 Egypt 1.2.15 Equatorial Guinea 1.2.16 Eritrea 1.2.17 Eswatini 1.2.18 Ethiopia 1.2.19 Gabon 1.2.20 The Gambia 1.2.21 Ghana 1.2.22 Guinea 1.2.23 Guinea-Bissau 1.2.24 Ivory Coast 1.2.25 Kenya 1.2.26 Lesotho 1.2.27 Liberia 1.2.28 Libya 1.2.29 Madagascar 1.2.30 Malawi 1.2.31 Mali 1.2.32 Mauritania 1.2.33 Mauritius 1.2.34 Morocco 1.2.35 Mozambique 1.2.36 Namibia 1.2.37 Niger 1.2.38 Nigeria 1.2.39 Rwanda 1.2.40 São Tomé and Príncipe 1.2.41 Senegal 1.2.42 Seychelles 1.2.43 Sierra Leone 1.2.44 Somalia 1.2.45 South Africa 1.2.46 South Sudan 1.2.47 Sudan 1.2.48 Tanzania 1.2.49 Togo 1.2.50 Tunisia 1.2.51 Uganda 1.2.52 Zambia 1.2.53 Zimbabwe 2 Antarctica 3 Asia Toggle Asia subsection 3.1 International lakes of Asia 3.2 Lists by country 3.2.1 Afghanistan 3.2.2 Armenia 3.2.3 Azerbaijan 3.2.4 Bahrain 3.2.5 Bangladesh 3.2.6 Bhutan 3.2.7 Brunei 3.2.8 Cambodia 3.2.9 China 3.2.10 Cyprus 3.2.11 East Timor 3.2.12 Georgia 3.2.13 India 3.2.14 Indonesia 3.2.15 Iran 3.2.16 Iraq 3.2.17 Israel 3.2.18 Japan 3.2.19 Jordan 3.2.20 Kazakhstan 3.2.21 North Korea 3.2.22 South Korea 3.2.23 Kuwait 3.2.24 Kyrgyzstan 3.2.25 Laos 3.2.26 Lebanon 3.2.27 Malaysia 3.2.28 Maldives 3.2.29 Mongolia 3.2.30 Myanmar 3.2.31 Nepal 3.2.32 Oman 3.2.33 Pakistan 3.2.34 Philippines 3.2.35 Qatar 3.2.36 Russia 3.2.37 Saudi Arabia 3.2.38 Singapore 3.2.39 Sri Lanka 3.2.40 Syria 3.2.41 Tajikistan 3.2.42 Thailand 3.2.43 Turkey 3.2.44 Turkmenistan 3.2.45 United Arab Emirates| United Arab Emirates - UAE 3.2.46 Uzbekistan 3.2.47 Vietnam 3.2.48 Yemen 3.2.49 State of Palestine|Palestine 3.2.50 Taiwan 4 Europe Toggle Europe subsection 4.1 International lakes of Europe 4.2 Lists by country 4.2.1 Albania 4.2.2 Andorra 4.2.3 Armenia 4.2.4 Austria 4.2.5 Azerbaijan 4.2.6 Belarus 4.2.7 Belgium 4.2.8 Bosnia and Herzegovina 4.2.9 Bulgaria 4.2.10 Croatia 4.2.11 Cyprus 4.2.12 Czech Republic 4.2.13 Denmark 4.2.14 Estonia 4.2.15 Finland 4.2.16 France 4.2.17 Georgia 4.2.18 Germany 4.2.19 Greece 4.2.20 Hungary 4.2.21 Iceland 4.2.22 Ireland 4.2.23 Italy 4.2.24 Kazakhstan 4.2.25 Latvia 4.2.26 Liechtenstein 4.2.27 Lithuania 4.2.28 Luxembourg 4.2.29 Malta 4.2.30 Moldova 4.2.31 Monaco 4.2.32 Montenegro 4.2.33 Netherlands 4.2.34 North Macedonia 4.2.35 Norway 4.2.36 Poland 4.2.37 Portugal 4.2.38 Romania 4.2.39 Russia 4.2.40 San Marino 4.2.41 Serbia 4.2.42 Slovakia 4.2.43 Slovenia 4.2.44 Spain 4.2.45 Sweden 4.2.46 Switzerland 4.2.47 Turkey 4.2.48 Ukraine 4.2.49 United Kingdom 5 North and Central America Toggle North and Central America subsection 5.1 International lakes of North America 5.2 Lists by country 5.2.1 Antigua and Barbuda 5.2.2 Bahamas 5.2.3 Barbados 5.2.4 Belize 5.2.5 Canada 5.2.6 Costa Rica 5.2.7 Cuba 5.2.8 Dominica 5.2.9 Dominican Republic 5.2.10 El Salvador 5.2.11 Grenada 5.2.12 Guatemala 5.2.13 Haiti 5.2.14 Honduras 5.2.15 Jamaica 5.2.16 Mexico 5.2.17 Nicaragua 5.2.18 Panama 5.2.19 Saint Kitts and Nevis 5.2.20 Saint Lucia 5.2.21 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 5.2.22 Trinidad and Tobago 5.2.23 United States 6 Oceania Toggle Oceania subsection 6.1 Lists by country 6.1.1 Australia 6.1.2 Federated States of Micronesia 6.1.3 Fiji 6.1.4 Kiribati 6.1.5 Marshall Islands 6.1.6 Nauru 6.1.7 New Zealand 6.1.8 Palau 6.1.9 Papua New Guinea 6.1.10 Samoa 6.1.11 Solomon Islands 6.1.12 Tonga 6.1.13 Tuvalu 6.1.14 Vanuatu 6.1.15 Wallis and Futuna 7 South America Toggle South America subsection 7.1 International lakes of South America 7.2 Lists by country 7.2.1 Argentina 7.2.2 Bolivia 7.2.3 Brazil 7.2.4 Chile 7.2.5 Colombia 7.2.6 Ecuador 7.2.7 Guyana 7.2.8 Paraguay 7.2.9 Peru 7.2.10 Suriname 7.2.11 Uruguay 7.2.12 Venezuela 8 Former lakes 9 Extraterrestrial lakes Toggle Extraterrestrial lakes subsection 9.1 Titan 10 See also 11 References Toggle the table of contents List of lakes 18 languages Afrikaans Bosanski Brezhoneg Čeština Eesti Español Français Galego हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia မြန်မာဘာသာ 日本語 Português Simple English سنڌي Slovenščina Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For other lists of lakes, see Lists of lakes .

This list of lakes includes those which are among the largest by area, depth, volume, or have cultural or environmental significance.

Africa [ edit ] Great Lakes of Africa [ edit ] See also: Great Lakes of Africa and Rift Valley lakes Lake Albert (Mobuto-Sese-Seko) Lake Chad Lake Edward Lake Fianga Lake Kariba Lake Kivu Lake Tana Lake Mweru Lake Nasser ( Lake Nubia in Sudan ) Lake Nyasa ( Lake Malawi ) Lake Tanganyika Lake Turkana (Lake Rudolf or Rudolph) Lake Victoria shared between Kenya , Uganda and Tanzania .

Lists by country [ edit ] Algeria [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Algeria .

Chott Ech Chergui Chott el Hodna Lake of Fetzara Lake Akfadou Réghaïa lake Sebkha el Melah See also: Category:Lakes of Algeria Angola [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Angola .

See also: Category:Lakes of Angola Dilolo Lake This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Benin [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Benin .

See also: Category:Lakes of Benin This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Botswana [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Botswana .

See also: Category:Lakes of Botswana Makadikadi Basin Lake Ngami Burkina Faso [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Burkina Faso .

See also: Category:Lakes of Burkina Faso This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Cameroon [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Cameroon .

See also: Category:Lakes of Cameroon A view of Lake Awing located in the North West Region of Cameroon Lake Awing Lake Bambili, Cameroon Lake Bambili Lake Bamendjing Lake Bankim Full extent of Lake Barombi , Cameroon Lake Barombi Lake Edip Lake Kendall Lake Lagdo Lake Mbakaou Lake Monoun , Cameroon Lake Monoun Lake Manengouba , Cameroon Muanenguba Lakes (Twin Lakes) Lake Nyos Lake Oku , Cameroon Lake Oku Lake Wum Cape Verde [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Cape Verde .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Central African Republic [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of the Central African Republic .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Chad [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Chad .

See also: Category:Lakes of Chad This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Lake Chad Comoros [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Comoros .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Democratic Republic of the Congo [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of the Democratic Republic of the Congo .

See also: Category:Lakes of the Democratic Republic of the Congo This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Republic of the Congo [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of the Republic of the Congo .

See also: Category:Lakes of the Republic of the Congo This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Djibouti [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Djibouti .

See also: Category:Lakes of Djibouti Lake Assal Egypt [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Egypt .

See also: Category:Lakes of Egypt This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Equatorial Guinea [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Equatorial Guinea .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Eritrea [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Eritrea .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Eswatini [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Eswatini .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Ethiopia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Ethiopia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Ethiopia This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Gabon [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Gabon .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) The Gambia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of The Gambia .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Ghana [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Ghana .

See also: Category:Lakes of Ghana Lake Volta Lake Bosomtwe Guinea [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Guinea .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Guinea-Bissau [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Guinea-Bissau .

See also: Category:Lakes of Guinea-Bissau This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Ivory Coast [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Ivory Coast .

See also: Category:Lakes of Ivory Coast This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Kenya [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Kenya .

See also: Category:Lakes of Kenya This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Lesotho [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Lesotho .

See also: Category:Lakes of Lesotho This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Liberia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Liberia .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Libya [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Libya .

See also: Category:Lakes of Libya This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Madagascar [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Madagascar .

See also: Category:Lakes of Madagascar Lake Alaotra Lake Bedo Lake Itasy Lake Ihotry Lake Kinkony Lake Tritriva Lake Tsimanampetsotsa Lakes Manambolomaty Malawi [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Malawi .

See also: Category:Lakes of Malawi Lake Chilwa Lake Malawi Mali [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Mali .

See also: Category:Lakes of Mali This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Mauritania [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Mauritania .

See also: Category:Lakes of Mauritania Lac de Mâl Mauritius [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Mauritius .

See also: Category:Lakes of Mauritius This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Morocco [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Morocco .

See also: Category:Lakes of Morocco This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Mozambique [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Mozambique .

See also: Category:Lakes of Mozambique Cabora Bassa Lake Namibia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Namibia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Namibia This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Niger [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Niger .

See also: Category:Lakes of Niger This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Nigeria [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Nigeria .

See also: Category:Lakes of Nigeria Kainji Lake Oguta Lake Asejire Lake Rwanda [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Rwanda .

See also: Category:Lakes of Rwanda This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) São Tomé and Príncipe [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of São Tomé and Príncipe .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Senegal [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Senegal .

See also: Category:Lakes of Senegal This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Seychelles [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Seychelles .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Sierra Leone [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Sierra Leone .

See also: Category:Lakes of Sierra Leone This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Somalia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Somalia .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) South Africa [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of South Africa .

See also: Category:Lakes of South Africa This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) South Sudan [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of South Sudan .

See also: Category:Lakes of South Sudan This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Sudan [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Sudan .

See also: Category:Lakes of Sudan Roseires Reservoir Lake No Lake Nubia (southern reaches of Lake Nasser ) Tanzania [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Tanzania .

See also: Category:Lakes of Tanzania This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Togo [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Togo .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Tunisia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Tunisia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Tunisia This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Uganda [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Uganda .

See also: Category:Lakes of Uganda This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Zambia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Zambia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Zambia This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Zimbabwe [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Zimbabwe .

See also: Category:Lakes of Zimbabwe This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Antarctica [ edit ] There are hundreds of lakes deep below the ice of Antarctica .

[ 1 ] For a more comprehensive list, see Antarctic lakes .

See also: Category:Lakes of Antarctica Basalt Lake Lake Brownworth Don Juan Pond Parochlus Lake Penny Lake Lake Pewe Lake Vanda Lake Vida Lake Vostok Lake Whillans Asia [ edit ] International lakes of Asia [ edit ] Pangong Tso Lake Baikal – Lake Baikal is located in Siberia in southeastern Russia, just north of Mongolia. Considered the oldest surviving freshwater lake on the planet, it is also the deepest body of water in Asia at 5,315 feet (1,620 m), and the largest freshwater lake by volume, containing 20% of the planet's fresh water. An elongated lake, it has a maximum width of 60 miles (97 km) with an approximate length of 389 miles (626 km), and is fed by more than 300 rivers and streams.

[ 2 ] Caspian Sea – Situated between Asia and Europe and fed by the Volga and Ural Rivers in the north, the Caspian Sea is nevertheless somewhat salty in its central and south portions. The surface area measures 371,000 square kilometres (143,000 sq mi), with a maximum depth of 1,025 metres (3,363 ft).

[ 2 ] Aral Sea – Also in far-western Asia, just east of the Caspian Sea, the Aral Sea straddles the boundary between Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan . The Aral Sea is shrinking due to evaporation and diversion for irrigation (among other factors) and what remains (only 10% of its former size) [ 3 ] is now almost totally polluted by fertilizer runoff, Soviet weapon testing residue and industrial projects, [ 2 ] leading to it being called "one of the planet's worst environmental disasters".

[ 4 ] North Aral Sea South Aral Sea Dead Sea – Located on the border of Israel and Jordan .

Lake Khanka Lists by country [ edit ] Afghanistan [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Afghanistan .

See also: Category:Lakes of Afghanistan Gowd-e-Zereh Armenia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Armenia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Armenia This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Azerbaijan [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Azerbaijan .

See also: Category:Lakes of Azerbaijan This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Bahrain [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Bahrain .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Bangladesh [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Bangladesh .

See also: Category:Lakes of Bangladesh Kaptai Lake Bhutan [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Bhutan .

See also: Category:Lakes of Bhutan This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Brunei [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Brunei .

See also: Category:Lakes of Brunei Cypt Cambodia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Cambodia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Cambodia Tonlé Sap Lake, Cambodia Tonlé Sap China [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of China .

See also: Category:Lakes of China Dongting Lake Poyang Lake Qinghai Lake Lake Tai Cyprus [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Cyprus .

See also: Category:Lakes of Cyprus This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) East Timor [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of East Timor .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Georgia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Georgia (country) .

See also: Category:Lakes of Georgia (country) This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) India [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of India .

See also: Category:Lakes of India Avalanche Lake Dal Lake Emerald Lake Chandra Taal Nainital Lake Sheshnag Lake Suraj Tal Tso Moriri Tsongmo Lake Chaluk lake Chilka Lake Shanti Sagara Indonesia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Indonesia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Indonesia Lake Toba Iran [ edit ] See also: Category:Lakes of Iran Caspian Sea Lake Urmia Gavkhouni Hamun Lake Namak Lake Bakhtegan Lake Maharloo Lake Zarivar Lake Iraq [ edit ] See also: Category:Lakes of Iraq Lake Habbaniyah (Hawr al Habbaniyah) Lake Milh (Bahr al Milh) Lake Tharthar (Buhayrat ath Tharthar) Sawa lake Israel [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Israel .

See also: Category:Lakes of Israel Dead Sea Sea of Galilee Japan [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Japan .

See also: Category:Lakes of Japan Lake Mashū Jordan [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Jordan .

Dead Sea This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Kazakhstan [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Kazakhstan .

See also: Category:Lakes of Kazakhstan Lake Alakol Lake Balkhash Chagan Lake Kaindy Lake Lake Sasykkol Lake Tengiz Lake Zaysan North Korea [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of North Korea .

See also: Category:Lakes of North Korea This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) South Korea [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of South Korea .

See also: Category:Lakes of South Korea This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Kuwait [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Kuwait .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Kyrgyzstan [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Kyrgyzstan .

See also: Category:Lakes of Kyrgyzstan Ala Köl Besh-Tash Lake Chatyr-Kul Issyk-Kul Jashyl Köl Juukuchak Lake Kapka Tash Lake Kara-Suu Lake Köl-Suu Költör Lake Kölükök Kulun Lake Kylaköl Ökürgön Lake Lake Sary-Chelek Merzbacher Lake Saryköl Song Köl Lake Laos [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Laos .

See also: Category:Lakes of Laos This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Lebanon [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Lebanon .

See also: Category:Lakes of Lebanon This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Malaysia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Malaysia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Malaysia This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Maldives [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of the Maldives .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Mongolia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Mongolia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Mongolia This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Myanmar [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Myanmar .

See also: Category:Lakes of Myanmar This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Nepal [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Nepal .

See also: Category:Lakes of Nepal Fewa Lake Rara Lake Rupa Lake Begnas Lake Shey phoksundo lake Tilicho Lake Gosaikunda Lake Oman [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Oman .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Pakistan [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Pakistan .

See also: Category:Lakes of Pakistan Lake Saiful Muluk , Kaghan Valley , Pakistan Rush Lake (Pakistan) , the highest lake in Pakistan and 27th-highest in the world [ 5 ] Attabad Lake Ansoo Lake Banjosa Lake Dudipatsar Lake Hanna Lake Karambar Lake Kundol Lake Lulusar Lake Mahodand Lake Payee Lake Pyala Lake Shangrila Lake Philippines [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of the Philippines .

See also: Category:Lakes of the Philippines Laguna de Bay Lake Lanao Qatar [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Russia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Russia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Russia Lake Baikal Saudi Arabia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Saudi Arabia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Saudi Arabia Al-Asfar Lake Modon Lake Lake Dumat al-Jandal Singapore [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Singapore .

See also: Category:Lakes of Singapore This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Sri Lanka [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Sri Lanka .

See also: Category:Lakes of Sri Lanka This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Syria [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Syria .

See also: Category:Lakes of Syria Lake Assad Lake Qattinah Lake Al-Rastan Lake Muzairib Zarzar Lake Lake Ballouran Tajikistan [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Tajikistan .

See also: Category:Lakes of Tajikistan This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Thailand [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Thailand .

See also: Category:Lakes of Thailand This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Turkey [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Turkey .

See also: Category:Lakes of Turkey Lake Van Turkmenistan [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Turkmenistan .

See also: Category:Lakes of Turkmenistan This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) United Arab Emirates| United Arab Emirates - UAE [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of the United Arab Emirates .

See also: Category:Lakes of the United Arab Emirates This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Uzbekistan [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Uzbekistan .

See also: Category:Lakes of Uzbekistan This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Vietnam [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Vietnam .

See also: Category:Lakes of Vietnam This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Yemen [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Yemen .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) State of Palestine|Palestine [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of the State of Palestine .

Dead Sea Sea of Galilee This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Taiwan [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Taiwan .

See also: Category:Lakes of Taiwan Chiaming Lake in Taitung County , Taiwan Bitan Lake Changpi Lake Chengcing Lake Chiaming Lake Cueifong Lake Gugang Lake Jinshi Lake Lantan Lake Liyu Lake Longtan Lake Meihua Lake Milk Lake Sun Moon Lake Zhongzheng Lake Europe [ edit ] See also: List of largest lakes of Europe International lakes of Europe [ edit ] Lake Constance ( Austria , Germany , Switzerland ; Bodensee) Dojran Lake ( North Macedonia and Greece ) Lake Geneva ( France , Switzerland ; Lac Léman) Lake Lugano ( Switzerland , Italy ) Lake Maggiore ( Switzerland , Italy ; Lago Maggiore) Lake Neusiedl (Neusiedler See)/Fertő ( Austria , Hungary ) Lake Ohrid ( North Macedonia , Albania ; Liqeni i Ohrit) Lake Peipsi-Pihkva ( Estonia , Russia ) Lake Great Prespa ( Albania , North Macedonia , Greece ) Lake Small Prespa ( Albania , Greece ) Lake Skadar ( Montenegro , Albania ; Liqeni i Shkodrës) Lake Vištytis ( Lithuania , Russia ) Lago di Lei (an artificial lake created by a dam; the waters are mostly in Italy but the dam is in Switzerland ).

Lists by country [ edit ] Albania [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Albania .

See also: Category:Lakes of Albania Lake Ohrid Andorra [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Andorra .

See also: Category:Lakes of Andorra This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Armenia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Armenia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Armenia Lake Sevan Lake Lessing Austria [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Austria .

See also: Category:Lakes of Austria Ahornsee Azerbaijan [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Azerbaijan .

See also: Category:Lakes of Azerbaijan Lake Sarysu Lake Ağgöl Belarus [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Belarus .

See also: Category:Lakes of Belarus This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Belgium [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Belgium .

See also: Category:Lakes of Belgium This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Bosnia and Herzegovina [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Bosnia and Herzegovina .

See also: Category:Lakes of Bosnia and Herzegovina This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Bulgaria [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Bulgaria .

See also: Category:Lakes of Bulgaria Lake Atanasovsko Banderishki Lakes Batak Reservoir Lake Burgas Dospat Reservoir Lake Durankulak Iskar Reservoir Lake Mandrensko Lake Pomorie Lake Varna Seven Rila Lakes Lake Srebarna Croatia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Croatia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Croatia This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Cyprus [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Cyprus .

See also: Category:Lakes of Cyprus Larnaca Salt Lake Limassol Salt Lake Czech Republic [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of the Czech Republic .

See also: Category:Lakes of the Czech Republic This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Denmark [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Denmark .

See also: Category:Lakes of Denmark This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Estonia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Estonia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Estonia This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Finland [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Finland .

See also: Category:Lakes of Finland This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) France [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of France .

See also: Category:Lakes of France This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Georgia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Georgia (country) .

See also: Category:Lakes of Georgia (country) This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Germany [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Germany .

See also: Category:Lakes of Germany This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Greece [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Greece .

See also: Category:Lakes of Greece This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Hungary [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Hungary .

See also: Category:Lakes of Hungary Lake Balaton Lake Tisza Lake Velencei Lake Hévíz Lake Vadkert Iceland [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Iceland .

See also: Category:Lakes of Iceland This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Ireland [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of the Republic of Ireland .

See also: Category:Lakes of the Republic of Ireland This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Italy [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Italy .

See also: Category:Lakes of Italy Lake Garda Kazakhstan [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Kazakhstan .

See also: Category:Lakes of Kazakhstan This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Latvia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Latvia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Latvia Lake Lubāns Lake Rāzna Lake Engure Liechtenstein [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Liechtenstein .

See also: Category:Lakes of Liechtenstein This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Lithuania [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Lithuania .

See also: Category:Lakes of Lithuania This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Luxembourg [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Luxembourg .

See also: Category:Lakes of Luxembourg This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Malta [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Malta .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Moldova [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Moldova .

See also: Category:Lakes of Moldova This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Monaco [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Monaco .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Montenegro [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Montenegro .

See also: Category:Lakes of Montenegro This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Netherlands [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of the Netherlands .

See also: Category:Lakes of the Netherlands This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) North Macedonia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of North Macedonia .

See also: Category:Lakes of North Macedonia This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Norway [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Norway .

See also: Category:Lakes of Norway This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Poland [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Poland .

See also: Category:Lakes of Poland Lake Śniardwy Lake Mamry Lake Ruda Woda Lake Łebsko Lake Dąbie Lake Miedwie Lake Jeziorak Lake Niegocin Lake Hańcza Portugal [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Portugal .

See also: Category:Lakes of Portugal This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Romania [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Romania .

See also: Category:Lakes of Romania This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Russia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Russia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Russia This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) San Marino [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of San Marino .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Serbia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Serbia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Serbia Lake Palić Perućac Lake Vlasina Lake Slovakia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Slovakia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Slovakia Blatné Devínske Jazero Morské oko Štrbské pleso Zemplínska šírava Zlaté Piesky Slovenia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Slovenia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Slovenia Lake Cerknica Spain [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Spain .

See also: Category:Lakes of Spain Lake of Banyoles El Atazar Dam Estanys de Baiau Lakes of Covadonga Embalse de Navacerrada Sanabria Lake Natural Park Sweden [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Sweden .

See also: Category:Lakes of Sweden Vänern Vättern Mälaren Hjälmaren Storsjön Switzerland [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Switzerland .

See also: Category:Lakes of Switzerland This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Turkey [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Turkey .

See also: Category:Lakes of Turkey This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Ukraine [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of largest lakes of Ukraine .

See also: Category:Lakes of Ukraine This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) United Kingdom [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of the United Kingdom .

See also: Category:Lakes of the United Kingdom This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) North and Central America [ edit ] International lakes of North America [ edit ] Listed in order of occurrence from easternmost border terminus to the westernmost Woodland Flowage Grand Falls Flowage Spednic Lake (part of the Chiputneticook Lakes ) East Grand Lake (part of the Chiputneticook Lakes ) North Lake , partly in North Lake Parish, New Brunswick Glazier Lake Beau Lake Lac de l'Est Little St. John Lake ( Petit lac Saint-Jean ) Lac Wallace Line Pond ( Etang Duck ) Lake Memphremagog a 40-mile-long (64 km) glacial lake that extends from Vermont into Canada Lake Champlain in Quebec in Canada and New York and Vermont in the United States (US) Lake Ontario in Ontario , Canada; and New York in the US Lake Erie in Ontario in Canada and Michigan , New York , Ohio , and Pennsylvania in the US Lake St Clair in Ontario , Canada; and Michigan in the US Lake Huron in Ontario in Canada and Michigan in the US Munuscong Lake Lake George Lake Superior in Ontario , Canada; and Michigan , Minnesota , and Wisconsin in the US South Fowl Lake North Fowl Lake Moose Lake , entry point into the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness Mountain Lake (Cook County, Minnesota) Rose Lake (Pigeon River) South Lake North Lake Gunflint Lake Magnetic Lake Clove Lake Granite Lake in Minnesota, US, and Ontario, Canada Granite Bay Gneiss Lake Maraboeuf Lake Saganaga Lake Swamp Lake Ottertrack Lake Knife Lake Carp Lake in Minnesota, US, and Ontario, Canada Birch Lake in Minnesota, US, and Ontario, Canada Sucker Lake Basswood Lake Wednesday Bay Thursday Bay Crooked Lake in Minnesota, US, and Ontario, Canada Sunday Bay Bottle Lake Lac la Croix Loon Lake Little Vermillion Lake Sand Point Lake Rainy Lake Lake of the Woods in Minnesota , US ; Manitoba and Ontario in Canada Wilfred's Lake Susie Lake Osthus Lake South Messier Lake Hartley Lake Boundary Lake in North Dakota , US ; Manitoba , Canada Cavalier Lake Ross Lake in North Dakota, US, and Manitoba, Canada Lake Metigoshe Bone Lake Line Lake Brush Lake in North Dakota, US, and Saskatchewan, Canada Salt Lake in northeastern Montana , US; known as Alkali Lake in Saskatchewan , Canada Upper Waterton Lake in Alberta , Canada; and Montana , US Cameron Lake in Alberta , Canada; and Montana , US Frozen Lake Lake Koocanusa Alden Lake Osoyoos Lake Ross Lake in Washington, US, and British Columbia, Canada See also: North American Great Lakes Lists by country [ edit ] Antigua and Barbuda [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Antigua and Barbuda .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Bahamas [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of the Bahamas .

See also: Category:Lakes of the Bahamas This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Barbados [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Barbados .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Belize [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Belize .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Canada [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Canada .

See also: Category:Lakes of Canada Turtle Lake (Vancouver Island) Lake Huron Lake Superior Great Bear Lake Great Slave Lake Lake Erie Lake Winnipeg Lake Ontario Lake Athabasca Reindeer Lake Smallwood Reservoir Nettilling Lake Lake Winnipegosis Lake Nipigon Lake Manitoba Lake of the Woods Caniapiscau Reservoir Dubawnt Lake Costa Rica [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Costa Rica .

See also: Category:Lakes of Costa Rica This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Cuba [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Cuba .

See also: Category:Lakes of Cuba This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Dominica [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Dominica .

See also: Category:Lakes of Dominica This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Dominican Republic [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of the Dominican Republic .

See also: Category:Lakes of the Dominican Republic This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) El Salvador [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of El Salvador .

See also: Category:Lakes of El Salvador Lago de Coatepeque (Coatepeque Lake) Lago De Ilopango (Ilopango Lake) Laguna De Güija (Güija Lake) Laguna Verde Laguna de Alegria Olomega Lake Suchitlán Lake Grenada [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Grenada .

See also: Category:Lakes of Grenada This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Guatemala [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Guatemala .

See also: Category:Lakes of Guatemala Lake Atitlan Haiti [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Haiti .

See also: Category:Lakes of Haiti This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Honduras [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Honduras .

See also: Category:Lakes of Honduras Lake Yojoa Jamaica [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Jamaica .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Mexico [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Mexico .

See also: Category:Lakes of Mexico Lake Chapala Lake Texcoco Lake Catemaco Lake Patzcuaro Lake Cuitzeo Lake Zirahuen Nicaragua [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Nicaragua .

See also: Category:Lakes of Nicaragua Lake Apanás Lake Nicaragua (Lake Cocibolca) Lake Managua Laguna de Apoyo Panama [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Panama .

See also: Category:Lakes of Panama Lago Bayano Gatun Lake Saint Kitts and Nevis [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Saint Kitts and Nevis .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Saint Lucia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Saint Lucia .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Saint Vincent and the Grenadines [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Trinidad and Tobago [ edit ] See also: Category:Lakes of Trinidad and Tobago This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) United States [ edit ] The Great Lakes on June 23, 2022, from the International Space Station For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of the United States .

See also: Category:Lakes of the United States Crater Lake Great Salt Lake The Great Lakes : Lake Superior , Lake Huron , Lake Michigan , Lake Erie , Lake Ontario Lake Champlain Lake Okeechobee Lake Pontchartrain Lake Tahoe Lake Winnebago Oceania [ edit ] Lists by country [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Australia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Australia This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Federated States of Micronesia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of the Federated States of Micronesia .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Fiji [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Fiji .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Kiribati [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Kiribati .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Marshall Islands [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of the Marshall Islands .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Nauru [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Nauru .

See also: Category:Lakes of Nauru Buada Lagoon New Zealand [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of New Zealand .

See also: Category:Lakes of New Zealand This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Palau [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Palau .

See also: Category:Lakes of Palau This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Papua New Guinea [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Papua New Guinea .

See also: Category:Lakes of Papua New Guinea This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Samoa [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Samoa .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Solomon Islands [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Solomon Islands .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Tonga [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Tonga .

See also: Category:Lakes of Tonga This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Tuvalu [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Tuvalu .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Vanuatu [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Vanuatu .

See also: Category:Lakes of Vanuatu This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Wallis and Futuna [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Wallis and Futuna .

See also: Category:Lakes of Wallis and Futuna This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( August 2021 ) South America [ edit ] International lakes of South America [ edit ] Lake Titicaca (in Peru and Bolivia ) General Carrera Lake (in Chile and Argentina ) O'Higgins/San Martín Lake (in Chile and Argentina) Cochrane/Pueyrredón Lake (in Chile and Argentina) Cami/Fagnano Lake (in Chile and Argentina) Palena/General Vintter Lake (in Chile and Argentina) Lake Viedma (undefined border near the Southern Patagonian Ice Field between Chile and Argentina) Lists by country [ edit ] Argentina [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Argentina .

See also: Category:Lakes of Argentina This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Bolivia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Bolivia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Bolivia This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Brazil [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Brazil .

See also: Category:Lakes of Brazil This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Chile [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Chile .

See also: Category:Lakes of Chile This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Colombia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Colombia .

See also: Category:Lakes of Colombia This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Ecuador [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Ecuador .

See also: Category:Lakes of Ecuador This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Guyana [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Guyana .

See also: Category:Lakes of Guyana Capoey Lake Mainstay Lake Tapakuma Lake Hot and Cold Lake Lukunanikabra Lake Lamparina Lake Lukunanikabra Lake Kara Kara Blue Lake Paraguay [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Paraguay .

See also: Category:Lakes of Paraguay This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Peru [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Peru .

See also: Category:Lakes of Peru Lake Titicaca Quñuqqucha Suriname [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Suriname .

Brokopondo Reservoir Uruguay [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Uruguay .

See also: Category:Lakes of Uruguay This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) Venezuela [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of lakes of Venezuela .

See also: Category:Lakes of Venezuela Guri (man-made) Lake Maracaibo (sometimes considered a sea) Lake Valencia Former lakes [ edit ] See also: List of prehistoric lakes Lake Agassiz Lake Ballivián Lake Hula Lake Makgadikgadi Lop Nur Owens Lake Tulare Lake Extraterrestrial lakes [ edit ] See also: Category:Extraterrestrial lakes Titan [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see Lakes of Titan .

See also: Category:Lakes of Titan (moon) This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2020 ) See also [ edit ] Lakes portal List of lakes by area List of lakes by depth List of lakes by volume List of dams and reservoirs List of international lakes v t e Lists of bodies of water List of...

Lists of...

Category — — List of lakes List of waterways List of waterfalls List of dams and reservoirs — List of straits List of seas Lists of bodies of water Lists of rivers Lists of lakes Lists of waterways — — Lists of canals — — Category:Lists of bodies of water Category: Lists of rivers Category: Lists of lakes — — Category: Lists of dams Category: Lists of canals — Category: Lists of seas References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lakes .

^ See map in Aldhous, Peter (August 23, 2014).

"First samples of Antarctic lake reveal thriving life" .

New Scientist : 12.

doi : 10.1016/S0262-4079(14)61609-2 . Archived from the original on August 23, 2014.

^ a b c "Lakes of Asia, Landforms of Asia – Worldatlas.com" .

WorldAtlas . Reunion Technology Inc . Retrieved August 15, 2020 .

^ Micklin, Philip; Aladin, Nikolay V. (April 2008).

"Reclaiming the Aral Sea" .

Scientific American . Retrieved May 17, 2008 .

^ "Aral Sea 'one of the planet's worst environmental disasters' " .

The Daily Telegraph . London. April 5, 2010. Archived from the original on April 8, 2010 . Retrieved May 1, 2010 .

^ "The Highest Lake in the World" .

highestlake.com . Retrieved October 13, 2019 .

This article includes a geography-related list of lists .

v t e List of lakes of Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland v t e List of lakes of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e Lists of lakes of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard v t e List of lakes of  North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands v t e List of lakes of Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna v t e List of lakes of South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐86985f5756‐bsdht
Cached time: 20250812160502
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.906 seconds
Real time usage: 2.243 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 43166/1000000
Revision size: 45512/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 632141/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 29371/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 413/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 462252/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.952/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10591455/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1726.172      1 -total
 23.63%  407.906    143 Template:Expand_section
 19.10%  329.626    200 Template:Main_list
 18.54%  319.979    143 Template:Ambox
 18.53%  319.820    205 Template:Category_see_also_if_exists
 10.65%  183.893    105 Template:Iso2country
  7.89%  136.210      4 Template:Navbox
  7.02%  121.215      1 Template:Asia_topic
  6.05%  104.439      1 Template:Europe_topic
  5.84%  100.818      1 Template:Reflist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:179604:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812160502 and revision id 1305530742. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_lakes&oldid=1305530742 " Categories : Lists of geography lists Lists of lakes Lists of bodies of water Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles to be expanded from June 2020 All articles to be expanded Articles to be expanded from August 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata Lists of lists with listcat specified This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 16:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of lakes 18 languages Add topic

