Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Glyphs, graphemes and characters 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Glyph 51 languages العربية বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kreyòl ayisyen Македонски Nāhuatl Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Purposeful written mark This article is about the typographical term. For other uses, see Glyph (disambiguation) .

Various glyphs representing lower case letter ⟨a⟩ in various typefaces and as single- and double-storey; they are allographs of the same grapheme Look up glyph in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

This page uses notation for orthographic or other linguistic analysis.

For the meaning of  how ⟨ ⟩ , | | , / / , and [ ] are used here, see this page .

A glyph ( / ɡ l ɪ f / GLIF ) is any kind of purposeful mark. In typography , a glyph is "the specific shape, design, or representation of a character".

[ 1 ] It is a particular graphical representation, in a particular typeface , of an element of written language. A grapheme , or part of a grapheme (such as a diacritic ), or sometimes several graphemes in combination (a composed glyph) [ a ] can be represented by a glyph.

Glyphs, graphemes and characters [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Glyph" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In modern English, symbols like letters and numerical digits are each both single graphemes and single glyphs. In most languages written in any variety of the Latin alphabet except English, [ b ] the use of diacritics to signify a sound mutation is common. For example, the grapheme ⟨à⟩ requires two glyphs: the basic | a | and the grave accent | ` | . In general, a diacritic is regarded as a glyph, [ 2 ] even if it is contiguous with the rest of the character like a cedilla in French , Catalan or Portuguese , the ogonek in several languages, or the stroke on a Polish ⟨ Ł ⟩ . Although these marks originally had no independent meaning, they have since acquired meaning in the field of mathematics and computing, for instance.

Conversely, in the languages of Western Europe, the dot (formally, tittle ) on a lower-case ⟨i⟩ is not a glyph in itself because it does not convey any distinction, and an | ı | in which the dot has been accidentally omitted is still likely to be recognized correctly. However, in Turkish and adjacent languages, this dot is a glyph because that language has two distinct versions of the letter i , with and without a dot .

In Japanese syllabaries , some of the characters are made up of more than one separate mark, but in general these separate marks are not glyphs because they have no meaning by themselves. However, in some cases, additional marks fulfil the role of diacritics , to differentiate distinct characters. Such additional marks constitute glyphs.

Some characters such as | æ | in Icelandic and | ß | in German may be regarded as glyphs. They were originally typographic ligatures , but over time have become characters in their own right; these languages treat them as unique letters. However, a ligature such as | fi | , that is treated in some typefaces as a single unit, is arguably not a glyph as this is just a design choice of that typeface, essentially an allographic feature, and includes more than one grapheme.

[ 2 ] In normal handwriting, even long words are often written "joined up", without the pen leaving the paper, and the form of each written letter will often vary depending on which letters precede and follow it, but that does not make the whole word into a single glyph.

Older models of typewriters required the use of multiple glyphs to depict a single character, as an overstruck apostrophe and full stop to create an exclamation mark . If there is more than one allograph of a unit of writing, and the choice between them depends on context or on the preference of the author, they now have to be treated as separate glyphs, because mechanical arrangements have to be available to differentiate between them and to print whichever of them is required.

In computing as well as typography, the term character refers to a grapheme or grapheme-like unit of text, as found in writing systems ( scripts ). In typography and computing, the range of graphemes is broader than in a written language in other ways too: a typeface often has to cope with a range of different languages each of which contribute their own graphemes, and it may also be required to print non-linguistic symbols such as dingbats . The range of glyphs required increases correspondingly. In summary, in typography and computing, a glyph is a graphical unit.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Character encoding – Using numbers to represent text characters Complex text layout – Neighbour-dependent grapheme positioning Glyph Bitmap Distribution Format – File format for storing bitmap fonts Hieroglyph – Formal writing system used by Ancient Egyptians Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets International Phonetic Alphabet § Brackets and transcription delimiters Letter cutting – Form of inscriptional architectural lettering Palaeography – Study of handwriting and manuscripts Punchcutting – Craft used in traditional typography Sort (typesetting) – Block with a typographic character etched on it, which is lined up with others to print text Notes [ edit ] ^ For example, the ampersand ⟨&⟩ began as two letters ( ⟨e⟩ and ⟨t⟩ , the Latin word et ) that over the centuries became combined into a single unit known as a ligature ^ ignoring special cases such as personal names and imported words References [ edit ] ^ Strizver, Ilene.

"Confusing (and Frequently Misused) Type Terminology, Part 1" .

fonts.com . Monotype Imaging. Archived from the original on 25 December 2011.

^ a b c Whistler, Ken; Davis, Mark; Freytag, Asmus (11 November 2008).

"Characters Vs Glyphs" . Unicode Consortium.

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of glyph at Wiktionary Media related to Glyphs at Wikimedia Commons v t e Lexicology Major terms Lexical item Lexicon Lexis Word Elements Chereme Glyphs Grapheme Lemma Lexeme Morpheme Phoneme Seme Sememe Semantic relations Antonymy Hypernymy and hyponymy Meronymy and holonymy Idiom Lexical semantics Semantic network Synonym Troponymy Functions Function word Headword Fields Controlled vocabulary English lexicology and lexicography International scientific vocabulary Lexicographic error Lexicographic information cost Linguistic prescription Morphology Specialized lexicography Linguistics portal v t e Typography Page Canons of page construction Column Even working Margin Page numbering Paper size Pagination Pull quote Recto and verso Intentionally blank page Paragraph Alignment Leading Line length River Runaround Widows and orphans runt Character Typeface anatomy Counter Diacritics Dingbat Glyph Ink trap Ligature Rotation Subscript and superscript Swash Text figures Tittle Capitalization All caps Camel case Initial Letter case Small caps Snake case Title case Visual distinction Blackboard bold Bold Color printing Italics Oblique Underline Whitespace Horizontal aspects Figure space Kerning Letter spacing Pitch Sentence spacing Thin space Word spacing Vertical aspects Ascender Baseline Body height Cap height Descender Mean line Overshoot x-height Typeface classifications Roman type Serif Antiqua Didone slab serif Sans-serif Blackletter type Fraktur Rotunda Schwabacher Gaelic type Insular Uncial Specialist Record type Display typeface script fat face reverse-contrast Punctuation ( List ) Bullet Dash Hanging punctuation Hyphen minus sign Interpunct Space Vertical bar Typesetting Etaoin shrdlu Font computer monospaced Font catalog For position only Letterpress Lorem ipsum Microprinting Microtypography Movable type Pangram Phototypesetting Punchcutting Reversing type Sort Type color Type design Typeface list Typographic units Agate Cicero Em En Metric units Pica Point traditional point-size names Twip Digital typography Character encoding Hinting Text shaping Rasterization Typographic features Web typography Bézier curves Desktop publishing Typography in other writing systems Arabic Cyrillic PT Fonts East Asian Thai National Fonts Related articles Penmanship Handwriting Handwriting script Calligraphy Style guide Type design Type foundry History of Western typography Intellectual property protection of typefaces Technical lettering Vox-ATypI classification Related template Punctuation and other typographic symbols Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐9c8rl
Cached time: 20250814215556
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.415 seconds
Real time usage: 0.569 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2676/1000000
Revision size: 6282/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 68317/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1954/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 31966/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.272/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16882384/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  496.104      1 -total
 16.49%   81.818      4 Template:Navbox
 15.38%   76.291      2 Template:Efn
 15.07%   74.758      2 Template:Reflist
 14.79%   73.368      2 Template:Lang
 14.42%   71.539      1 Template:Lexicology
 12.79%   63.433      2 Template:Cite_web
 11.19%   55.532      8 Template:Annotated_link
 11.13%   55.192      1 Template:Short_description
  6.64%   32.918      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:12904:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215556 and revision id 1302743674. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Glyph&oldid=1302743674 " Categories : Archaeological terminology Orthography Glyphs Typography Hidden categories: Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2025 Articles needing additional references from September 2021 All articles needing additional references Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 07:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Glyph 51 languages Add topic

