Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 1971–1988: Early radio career 2.2 1988–1990s: WABC New York City, syndication, and tie brand 2.3 2000s 2.4 2010s 2.5 2020s 2.6 The Rush Limbaugh Show 2.7 Television show 2.8 Other media appearances 3 Views Toggle Views subsection 3.1 Race 3.2 Taxes 3.3 LGBT and AIDS 3.4 Sexual consent 3.5 Drug policy 3.6 Environmental issues 3.7 Feminism 3.8 Abortion 3.9 Middle East 3.10 Trade 3.11 Barack Obama 3.12 Relationship with Donald Trump 3.13 Alleging false flag attacks 4 Controversies and inaccuracies Toggle Controversies and inaccuracies subsection 4.1 Hu Jintao 4.2 Joseph Kony 4.3 Deepwater Horizon 4.4 Unite the Right 4.5 Chelsea Clinton 4.6 Michael J. Fox 4.7 Phony soldiers 4.8 Bid for ownership of the Rams 4.9 Sandra Fluke 4.10 COVID-19 pandemic in the United States 5 Charitable work Toggle Charitable work subsection 5.1 Leukemia and lymphoma telethon 5.2 Marine Corps–Law Enforcement Foundation 5.3 Tunnel to Towers Foundation 6 Published works 7 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 7.1 Prescription drug addiction 7.2 Viagra incident 7.3 Health problems and death 8 Influence and legacy 9 Select bibliography 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Citations 10.2 Sources 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Rush Limbaugh 39 languages Afrikaans العربية تۆرکجه Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kiswahili Latviešu Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American political commentator (1951–2021) For his grandfather and politician, see Rush Limbaugh Sr.

For the radio show, see The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Rush Limbaugh Limbaugh in 2019 Born Rush Hudson Limbaugh III ( 1951-01-12 ) January 12, 1951 Cape Girardeau, Missouri , U.S.

Died February 17, 2021 (2021-02-17) (aged 70) Palm Beach, Florida , U.S.

Resting place Bellefontaine Cemetery , St. Louis, Missouri Occupations Radio host political pundit Years active 1967–2021 Spouses Roxy Maxine McNeely ​ ​ ( m.

1977; div.

1980) ​ Michelle Sixta ​ ​ ( m.

1983; div.

1990) ​ Marta Fitzgerald ​ ​ ( m.

1994; div.

2004) ​ Kathryn Rogers ​ ( m.

2010) ​ Relatives Limbaugh family Awards Marconi Award × 5 Radio Hall of Fame (1993) NAB Hall of Fame (1998) Medal of Freedom (2020) Website rushlimbaugh .com This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Rush Hudson Limbaugh III ( / ˈ l ɪ m b ɔː / LIM -baw ; January 12, 1951 – February 17, 2021) was an American conservative political commentator who was the host of The Rush Limbaugh Show , which first aired in 1984 and was nationally syndicated on AM and FM radio stations from 1988 until his death in 2021.

Limbaugh became one of the most prominent conservative voices in the United States during the 1990s and hosted a national television show from 1992 to 1996. He was among the most highly paid figures in American radio history; in 2018 Forbes listed his earnings at $84.5 million.

[ 1 ] In December 2019, Talkers Magazine estimated that Limbaugh's show attracted a cumulative weekly audience of 15.5 million listeners to become the most-listened-to radio show in the United States .

[ 2 ] Limbaugh also wrote seven books; his first two, The Way Things Ought to Be (1992) and See, I Told You So (1993), made The New York Times Best Seller list .

Limbaugh garnered controversy from his statements on race , LGBT matters , feminism , sexual consent , and climate change . In 1993, he was inducted into the National Radio Hall of Fame and in 1998 the National Association of Broadcasters Hall of Fame . During the 2020 State of the Union Address , President Donald Trump awarded him the Presidential Medal of Freedom .

[ 3 ] Early life Limbaugh was born on January 12, 1951, in Cape Girardeau, Missouri , [ 4 ] to parents Rush Hudson Limbaugh II [ 4 ] and Mildred Carolyn ( née Armstrong ) Limbaugh. He and his younger brother David were born into the prominent political Limbaugh family ; his father was a lawyer and a United States fighter pilot who served in the China Burma India Theater of World War II . His mother was from Searcy, Arkansas . The name "Rush" was originally chosen for his grandfather to honor the maiden name of a family member, Edna Rush.

[ 5 ] Limbaugh was partly of German ancestry .

[ 6 ] The family includes many lawyers, including his grandfather, father and brother; his uncle, Stephen N. Limbaugh Sr.

, was a federal judge in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri . His cousin, Stephen N. Limbaugh Jr.

, is a judge in the same court, appointed by George W. Bush . Limbaugh's grandfather, Rush Limbaugh Sr.

, was a Missouri prosecutor, judge, special commissioner, member of the Missouri House of Representatives in the 1930s, and longtime president of the Missouri Historical Society .

[ 7 ] In 1969, Limbaugh graduated from Cape Girardeau Central High School , where he played football and was a Boys State delegate.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] At age 16, he worked his first radio job at KGMO , a local radio station. He used the airname Rusty Sharpe having found "Sharpe" in a telephone book.

[ 5 ] [ 12 ] Limbaugh later cited Chicago DJ Larry Lujack as a major influence on him, saying Lujack was "the only person I ever copied." [ 13 ] In deference to his parents' desire that he attend college, he enrolled at Southeast Missouri State University but dropped out after two semesters. According to his mother, "he flunked everything [...] he just didn't seem interested in anything except radio." [ 5 ] [ 14 ] Biographer Zev Chafets asserts that Limbaugh's life was in large part dedicated to gaining his father's respect.

[ 15 ] Career 1971–1988: Early radio career In February 1971, after dropping out of college, the 20-year-old Limbaugh accepted an offer to DJ at WIXZ , a Top 40 station in McKeesport, Pennsylvania . He adopted the airname "Bachelor Jeff" Christie and worked afternoons before moving to morning drive.

[ 16 ] The station's general manager compared Limbaugh's style at this time to "early Imus ".

[ 17 ] In 1973, after eighteen months at WIXZ, Limbaugh was fired from the station due to "personality conflict" with the program director. He then started a nighttime position at KQV in Pittsburgh, succeeding Jim Quinn .

[ 18 ] In late 1974, Limbaugh was dismissed after new management put pressure on the program director to fire him. Limbaugh recalled the general manager telling him that he would never land success as an air personality and suggested a career in radio sales.

[ 19 ] After rejecting his only offer at the time, a position in Neenah, Wisconsin , Limbaugh returned to living with his parents in Cape Girardeau.

[ 18 ] During his time in Pittsburgh, he became a lifelong fan of the Steelers NFL team.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] In 1975, Limbaugh began an afternoon show at the Top 40 station KUDL in Kansas City, Missouri . He soon became the host of a public affairs talk program that aired on weekend mornings which allowed him to develop his style and present more controversial ideas.

[ 23 ] In 1977, he was let go from the station but remained in Kansas City to start an evening show at KFIX . The stint was short-lived, however, and disagreements with management led to his dismissal weeks later.

[ 24 ] By this time, Limbaugh had become disillusioned with radio and felt pressure to pursue a different career. He looked back on himself as "a moderate failure [...] as a deejay".

[ 25 ] In 1979, he accepted a part-time role in group sales for the Kansas City Royals baseball team which developed into a full-time position as director of group sales and special events. He worked from the Royals Stadium .

[ 26 ] There he developed a friendship with then-Royals star third baseman and future Hall of Famer George Brett . The two men remained close friends.

[ 27 ] Limbaugh said that business trips to Europe and Asia during this time developed his conservative views as he considered countries in those geographic areas to have lower standards of living than the United States.

[ 28 ] In November 1983, Limbaugh returned to radio at KMBZ (AM) in Kansas City for a year. He decided to drop his on-air moniker and broadcast under his real name.

[ 29 ] He was fired from the station, but weeks later he landed a spot on KFBK in Sacramento, California , replacing Morton Downey Jr.

The show launched on October 14, 1984.

[ 30 ] Limbaugh began to express his political opinions in 1985 when he mocked the Great Peace March for Global Nuclear Disarmament , which he considered along with the general anti-war movement to be "inherently anti-US , yet was reported as substantive and morally correct by a willing and sympathetic media".

[ 31 ] The FCC 's repeal of the fairness doctrine —which had required that stations provide free air time for responses to any controversial opinions that were broadcast—on August 5, 1987, meant stations could broadcast editorial commentary without having to present opposing views.

Daniel Henninger wrote, in a Wall Street Journal editorial, " Ronald Reagan tore down this wall [the fairness doctrine] in 1987 ... and Rush Limbaugh was the first man to proclaim himself liberated from the East Germany of liberal media domination." [ 32 ] 1988–1990s: WABC New York City, syndication, and tie brand At The Phil Donahue Show , 1991 In 1988, former ABC Radio Network executive Ed McLaughlin offered Limbaugh the nationally syndicated 12pm–2pm slot at ABC Radio Network to replace Owen Spann. Since many local radio stations of the time were hesitant to carry nationally syndicated programming during the daytime, he also secured Limbaugh a separate 10am–12pm show at WABC-AM in New York City to satisfy the provision of his contract requiring employment in a Top 5 market to leave KMBZ.

[ 33 ] Limbaugh began his new show at WABC-AM on July 4, 1988, with the first episode focusing on the Iran Air Flight 655 shootdown the previous day. His national program debuted on 50 stations the next month on August 1, and by three months later had expanded to 100 stations.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] He debuted just weeks after the Democratic National Convention , and just weeks before the Republican National Convention . Limbaugh's radio home in New York City was the talk-formatted WABC (AM), and this remained his flagship station for many years, even after Limbaugh moved to West Palm Beach , Florida , from where he broadcast his show.

[ 5 ] Limbaugh's show moved on January 1, 2014, to WABC's cross-town rival WOR (AM) , its final New York outlet.

[ 35 ] By 1990, Limbaugh had been on his Rush to Excellence Tour , a series of personal appearances in cities nationwide, for two years. For the 45 shows he completed that year alone, he was estimated to have made around $360,000.

[ 13 ] In December 1990, journalist Lewis Grossberger wrote in The New York Times Magazine that Limbaugh had "more listeners than any other talk show host" and described Limbaugh's style as "bouncing between earnest lecturer and political vaudevillian".

[ 13 ] Limbaugh's rising profile coincided with the Gulf War , coupled with a stalwart support for the war effort and relentless ridicule of peace activists .

[ according to whom?

] The program was moved to stations with larger audiences, eventually being broadcast on over 650 radio stations nationwide.

By the 1992 United States presidential election , Limbaugh had established himself as an influential political commentator. During the Republican Party presidential primaries , Limbaugh expressed a preference for Pat Buchanan over the incumbent George H. W. Bush , which Buchanan himself attributed to his early success in the primaries.

Bush's campaign subsequently worked to court Limbaugh, culminating with an invitation to stay overnight at the White House 's Lincoln Bedroom . Limbaugh was also given a seat at the president's box in the Houston Astrodome during the 1992 Republican National Convention , and both President Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle appeared on Limbaugh's program.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] In November 1992, Democrat Bill Clinton was elected President of the United States. Limbaugh satirized the policies of Clinton and First Lady Hillary Clinton , as well as those of the Democratic Party in general. Following the Republican Revolution , in which the party regained control of Congress in the 1994 midterm elections after several decades, the freshman Republican class awarded Limbaugh an honorary membership in their caucus, crediting him with having had a role in their success.

[ 40 ] In 1995, Limbaugh started selling a line of neckties under the brand No Boundaries Collection, [ 41 ] [ 42 ] designed by his then-wife Marta without themes, ties to politics, or ties to issues. Limbaugh complained about coverage of the line, which he said underrated the ties' radicalness, and said media descriptions were emblematic of their general inaccuracy.

[ 43 ] Sold in nearly 1,500 retail outlets by 1996, the brand sold more than $5,000,000 worth in the first year. The New York Times described the designs: "Much like their promulgator, Mr. Limbaugh's four dozen or so styles seem designed to evoke maximum sensory outrage. Like Rainbow Black, whose interweaving rainbow strands and blue raindrops play around an Ionic column, atop which a cranberry-red pomegranate tree sprouts from an urn. Or Triangle Red, with colliding stacks of black-and-yellow triangles and disjointed horizontal black stripes on a background of speckled salmon." [ 44 ] In 2000, Limbaugh rented the email list collected from the No Boundaries website to Rudy Giuliani 's senate campaign .

[ 45 ] The business dissolved along with his marriage to Marta [ 46 ] [ 47 ] but in 2020 the ties were still being sold by TieGal, Inc., for $29 each.

[ 48 ] 2000s Limbaugh had publicized personal difficulties in the 2000s. In late 2001, he acknowledged that he had become almost completely deaf, although he continued his show. He was able to regain much of his hearing with the help of a cochlear implant in 2001.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] In 2003, Limbaugh had a brief stint as a professional football commentator with ESPN . He resigned a few weeks into the 2003 NFL season after making comments about the press coverage for quarterback Donovan McNabb that caused controversy and accusations of racism on the part of Limbaugh. His comment about McNabb was: I don't think he's been that good from the get-go. I think what we've had here is a little social concern in the NFL . I think the media has been very desirous that a black quarterback do well. They're interested in black coaches and black quarterbacks doing well. I think there's a little hope invested in McNabb and he got a lot of credit for the performance of his team that he really didn't deserve. The defense carried this team.

[ 51 ] The sportswriter Peter King construed the comment as "boneheaded".

[ 52 ] The sports analyst Allen Barra wrote Limbaugh's viewpoint was shared by "many football fans and analysts" and "it is ... absurd to say that the sports media haven't overrated Donovan McNabb because he's black".

[ 53 ] Limbaugh in 2006 In 2003, Limbaugh stated that he was addicted to pain medication, and sought treatment.

[ 54 ] In April 2006, Limbaugh turned himself in to authorities, on a warrant issued by the Palm Beach County state attorney 's office, and was arrested "on a single charge of prescription fraud".

[ 55 ] His record was later expunged .

[ 56 ] 2010s In 2013, news reports indicated that Cumulus Media , some of whose stations carried Limbaugh's program in certain major markets, including New York, Chicago, Dallas , Washington D.C ., and Detroit, was considering dropping his show when its contract with Limbaugh expired at the end of that year, reportedly because the company believed that its advertising revenues had been hurt by listener reaction to controversial Limbaugh comments.

[ 57 ] Limbaugh himself said that the reports were overblown and that it was a matter of routine dollars-and-cents negotiations between Cumulus and his network syndication partner, Premiere Networks , a unit of Clear Channel Communications . Ultimately, the parties reached agreement on a new contract, with Limbaugh's show moving from its long-time flagship outlet in New York, the Cumulus-owned WABC, to the latter's cross-town rival, the Clear Channel-owned WOR, starting January 1, 2014, but remaining on the Cumulus-owned stations it was being carried on in other markets.

[ 57 ] 2020s In January 2021, Limbaugh called the GameStop short squeeze "the most fascinating thing" to happen in a long time and said that "the elites are bent out of shape that a bunch of average, ordinary users have figured out how to make themselves billionaires".

[ 58 ] The Rush Limbaugh Show Main article: The Rush Limbaugh Show Limbaugh's radio show aired for three hours each weekday beginning at noon Eastern Time on both AM and FM radio. The program was also broadcast worldwide on the Armed Forces Radio Network .

Radio broadcasting shifted from AM to FM in the 1970s because of the opportunity to broadcast music in stereo with better fidelity (AM stations in the United States would not get the opportunity to broadcast in stereo sound until August 2, 1982). Limbaugh's show was first nationally syndicated in August 1988, on the AM radio band. Limbaugh's popularity paved the way for other conservative talk radio programming to become commonplace on AM radio. The show increased its audience in the 1990s to the extent that even some FM stations picked it up. As of January 2019 [update] , about half of Limbaugh's affiliate stations were on the FM dial.

Limbaugh used props , songs, and photos to introduce his monologues on various topics. On his radio show, news about homeless people was often preceded by the Clarence "Frogman" Henry song " Ain't Got No Home ".

[ 13 ] In March 2006, WBAL in Baltimore became the first major market radio station in the country to drop Limbaugh's nationally syndicated radio program.

[ 59 ] In 2007, TALKERS Magazine again named him No.

1 in its "Heavy Hundred" most important talk show hosts.

Limbaugh frequently mentioned the EIB (Excellence In Broadcasting) Network, trademarked in 1990. In the beginning, his show was co-owned and first syndicated by Edward F. McLaughlin, former president of ABC , who founded EFM Media in 1988, with Limbaugh's show as his first product. In 1997, McLaughlin sold EFM to Jacor Communications , which was ultimately bought up by Clear Channel Communications. Limbaugh owned a majority of the show, which is syndicated by the Premiere Radio Networks .

According to a 2001 article in U.S. News & World Report , Limbaugh had an eight-year contract, at the rate of $31.25 million a year.

[ 60 ] In 2007, Limbaugh earned $33 million.

[ 61 ] A November 2008 poll by Zogby International found that Limbaugh was the most trusted news personality in the nation, garnering 12.5 percent of poll responses.

[ 62 ] Limbaugh signed a $400-million, eight-year contract in 2008 with what was then Clear Channel Communications, making him the highest-paid broadcaster on terrestrial radio. On August 2, 2016, Limbaugh signed a four-year extension of the 2008 contract.

[ 63 ] At the announcement of the extension, Premiere Radio Networks and iHeartMedia announced that his show experienced audience growth with 18% growth in adults 25–54, 27% growth with 25–54 women, and ad revenue growth of 20% year over year.

[ 63 ] In 2018, Limbaugh was the world's second (behind Howard Stern ) highest-paid radio host, reportedly earning $84.5 million.

[ 1 ] On January 5, 2020, Limbaugh renewed his contract again. Though media reports said it was "a long-term" renewal, (with no length specified), according to Donald Trump it was a four-year deal.

[ 64 ] Regular guest host Ken Matthews was also selected a TALKERS Magazine "Heavy Hundred".

[ 65 ] In May, Premiere Networks announced that on June 21, 2021, The Limbaugh Show radio timeslot would be taken over by Clay Travis and Buck Sexton in hundreds of markets.

[ 66 ] Television show Limbaugh had a syndicated half-hour television show from 1992 through 1996, produced by Roger Ailes . The show discussed many of the topics on his radio show, and was taped in front of an audience. In the months after its debut on September 12, 1992, it was the third highest rated late-night television show after Nightline and The Tonight Show with Jay Leno .

[ 36 ] Limbaugh said he loved doing his radio show, [ 67 ] but not a TV show.

[ 68 ] Other media appearances Limbaugh's first television hosting experience came March 30, 1990, as a guest host on Pat Sajak 's CBS late-night talk show, The Pat Sajak Show .

[ 69 ] ACT UP activists in the audience [ 70 ] heckled Limbaugh repeatedly; ultimately the entire studio audience was cleared. In 2001, Sajak said the incident was "legendary around CBS".

[ 71 ] On December 17, 1993, Limbaugh appeared on the Late Show with David Letterman .

[ 72 ] Limbaugh also guest-starred (as himself) on a 1994 episode of Hearts Afire . He appeared in the 1995 Billy Crystal film Forget Paris , and in 1998 on an episode of The Drew Carey Show .

[ 73 ] In 2007, Limbaugh made cameo appearances on Fox News Channel 's short-lived The 1/2 Hour News Hour in a series of parodies portraying him as the future President of the United States . In the parodies, his vice president was fellow conservative pundit Ann Coulter . That year, he also made a cameo in the Family Guy episode " Blue Harvest ", a parody of Star Wars in which Limbaugh can be heard on the radio claiming that the "liberal galactic media" were lying about climate change on the planet Hoth , and that Lando Calrissian 's administrative position on Cloud City was a result of affirmative action . His later appearances on Family Guy were in the 2010 episode " Excellence in Broadcasting ", and 2011's " Episode VI: It's a Trap!

", a parody of Return of the Jedi .

[ 73 ] Views Limbaugh in 2009 Wikiquote has quotations related to Rush Limbaugh .

In his first New York Times best seller , Limbaugh described himself as conservative, and was critical of broadcasters in many media outlets for claiming to be objective.

[ 74 ] He called for the adoption of core conservative philosophies in order to ensure the survival of the Republican Party.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] [ 77 ] Limbaugh criticized the media and political activist movements such as feminism , environmentalism , and animal rights activism for allegedly serving as outlets for " anticapitalism , secular humanism , and socialism ".

[ 78 ] Limbaugh, a proponent of American exceptionalism , often criticized politicians he believed reject this notion seeing them as unpatriotic or anti-American .

[ 28 ] Race Limbaugh was known for making controversial race-related statements regarding African Americans .

[ 79 ] He once opined that all newspaper composite pictures of wanted criminals resembled Jesse Jackson , and another time that "the NFL all too often looks like a game between the Bloods and the Crips without any weapons." [ 80 ] [ 70 ] While employed as what he described as an "insult-radio" DJ, he used a derogatory racial stereotype to characterize a black caller he could not understand, telling the caller to "take that bone out of your nose and call me back", although he expressed guilt over this when recounting it.

[ 70 ] Limbaugh asserted in 2008 that African Americans, in contrast with other minority groups, are "left behind" socially because they have been systematically trained from a young age to hate the United States because of the welfare state .

[ 81 ] On the topic of slavery , Limbaugh said, “If any race of people should not have guilt about slavery, it’s Caucasians.” [ 82 ] [ 83 ] Limbaugh argued that liberal politicians have encouraged immigration from Latin America but have discouraged their assimilation to deliberately create racial inequality to manipulate as a voter base, and that their continued admission will cause a collapse of representative democracy and rule of law in the United States. He criticized the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 for this reason.

[ 84 ] He said of the genocide of Native Americans , "Holocaust 90 million Indians? Only 4 million left? They all have casinos, what’s to complain about?" [ 85 ] [ 86 ] Taxes James Fallows described Limbaugh's economic ideology as "a doctrinaire version of supply-side economics " and noted that he frequently cited The Wall Street Journal in his radio shows and books.

[ 37 ] Limbaugh has called for fewer taxes, including progressive taxes targeted towards the wealthy, and argued the wealthy were being taxed excessively because they continued to pay the majority of taxes in the United States .

[ 87 ] Limbaugh further claimed that reductions in marginal tax rates would reduce poverty and inequality by removing obstacles towards economic growth, and that reducing marginal tax rates on the wealthy would increase tax revenue by increasing production. Limbaugh credited Reagan's tax cuts for ending the early 1980s recession , and blamed the early 1990s recession and rising rates of inequality on the American middle-class being "taxed at a confiscatory rate".

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] LGBT and AIDS Limbaugh expressed anti- LGBT views and viewed homosexual sexual practices as unhygienic. He made serophobic statements about HIV/AIDS victims in the 1980s [ 90 ] and 1990s, and called the virus " Rock Hudson 's disease" [ 91 ] and "the only federally-protected virus".

[ 92 ] For a time, Dionne Warwick 's song " I'll Never Love This Way Again " preceded reports about people with HIV/AIDS on his radio show.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] These later became " condom updates", preceded by The 5th Dimension 's song "Up, Up and Away" .

[ 13 ] Limbaugh defended President Reagan's response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic and falsely claimed that AIDS did not "spread to the heterosexual community" in the United States.

[ 95 ] When Freddie Mercury died of complications from AIDS in 1991, Limbaugh played a snippet of " Another One Bites the Dust ".

[ 96 ] In the early 1990s, Limbaugh ran a recurring segment, "AIDS Update", which mocked the deaths of gay individuals from HIV/AIDS, and read aloud the names of the dead.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] During the segment, he would play songs like "I'll Never Love This Way Again" and Johnny Lee's " Looking for Love in All the Wrong Places "; the Los Angeles Times reported that Limbaugh said, "Gays deserved their fate." [ 99 ] Limbaugh later called the segment "the single most regretful thing I have ever done." [ 100 ] [ 101 ] In 2013, Limbaugh commented on same-sex marriage by saying, "This issue is lost. I don't care what the Supreme Court does. This is inevitable. And it's inevitable because we lost the language on this. As far as I'm concerned, once we started talking about gay marriage, traditional marriage, opposite-sex marriage, same-sex marriage, hetero marriage, we lost. It was over." [ 102 ] [ 103 ] In 2016, Limbaugh described a program from the USDA for the LGBT community in rural America as, “I never knew that lesbians wanted to get behind the horse and the plow and start burrowing".

[ 104 ] In February 2020, Limbaugh predicted that Pete Buttigieg would not be able to win the 2020 presidential election because of his homosexuality.

[ 105 ] Sexual consent Limbaugh dismissed the concept of consent in sexual relations .

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] He viewed consent as "the magic key to the left ".

[ 108 ] In 2014, Limbaugh criticized a policy at Ohio State University encouraging students to obtain verbal consent, saying "How many of you guys ... have learned that 'no' means 'yes' if you know how to spot it?" [ 109 ] The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee used these statements to advocate a boycott of Limbaugh's show and advertisers, asserting that the statements were tantamount to an endorsement of sexual assault .

[ 110 ] Limbaugh denied this, and his spokesman Brian Glicklick and lawyer Patricia Glaser threatened a defamation lawsuit against the DCCC.

[ 111 ] According to spokesperson Emily Bittner, the DCCC did not receive any correspondence from Limbaugh or his attorney.

[ 112 ] Drug policy Limbaugh had been an outspoken critic of what he saw as leniency towards criminal drug use in the United States.

[ 113 ] On his television show on October 5, 1995, Limbaugh stated, "too many whites are getting away with drug use" and illegal drug trafficking.

[ 114 ] Limbaugh proposed that the racial disparity in drug enforcement could be fixed if authorities increased detection efforts, conviction rates and jail time for whites involved in illegal drugs.

[ 115 ] He defended mandatory-minimum sentencing as an effective tool against the crack cocaine epidemic of the 1980s.

[ 116 ] Limbaugh accused advocates of legalization of non-medical cannabis in the United States of hypocrisy due to their advocacy of tobacco control and backlash against electronic cigarettes , and compared the advocates for its legalization in Colorado to Big Tobacco .

[ 117 ] Limbaugh's past comments on drug users were highlighted by numerous media outlets after his own stint in a drug rehabilitation facility in 2003.

[ 114 ] Environmental issues Limbaugh was opposed to environmentalism and climate science .

[ 118 ] He rejected the relationship between CFCs and depletion of the ozone layer , claiming the scientific evidence did not support them.

[ 119 ] Limbaugh argued against the scientific consensus on climate change claiming it was "just a bunch of scientists organized around a political proposition" [ 120 ] and argued that projections of climate change were the product of ideologically motivated computer simulations without the proper support of empirical data , a claim which has been widely debunked.

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] Limbaugh used the term "environmentalist wacko" both when referring to left-leaning environmental advocates [ 123 ] and when referring to more mainstream climate scientists and other environmental scientists and advocates with whom he disagreed.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] Limbaugh opposed pollution credits , including a carbon cap-and-trade system , as a way to disproportionately benefit major American investment banks , particularly Goldman Sachs , and claimed that it would destroy the American national economy .

[ 126 ] Limbaugh wrote that "there are more acres of forestland in America today than when Columbus discovered the continent in 1492".

[ 127 ] Limbaugh strongly opposed the proposed Green New Deal and its sponsor Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez .

[ 128 ] Feminism Limbaugh was critical of feminism , which he viewed as advancing only liberals and not women in general.

[ 100 ] In a newspaper column he stated that it "was established so that unattractive ugly broads could have easy access to the mainstream of society." [ 85 ] [ 129 ] He has criticized Democratic congressmen calling for more women in Congress as hypocritical due to their opposition to female Republican candidates.

[ 100 ] He has also regularly used the term " feminazi ", described by The New York Times in 1994 as one of his "favorite epithets for supporters of women's rights".

[ 40 ] According to Limbaugh in 1992, for certain feminists, the "most important thing in life is ensuring that as many abortions as possible occur." [ 130 ] He also used the term referring to the half-million-large 2017 Women's March as the "Deranged Feminazi March".

[ 131 ] He credited his friend Tom Hazlett , a professor of law and economics at George Mason University , with coining the term.

[ 132 ] Abortion For two weeks in 1989, on his Sacramento radio show, Limbaugh performed "caller abortions " where he would end a call suddenly to the sounds of a vacuum cleaner and a scream.

[ 133 ] He would then deny that he had "hung up" on the caller, which he had promised not to do. Limbaugh claims that he used this gag to illustrate "the tragedy of abortion" as well as to highlight the question of whether abortion constitutes murder.

[ 134 ] In 2013, Limbaugh said that women were being turned into "abortion machines" by the Democratic Party.

[ 135 ] Middle East Limbaugh was supportive of the Iraq War , and first suggested bombing Ba'athist Iraq in 2002 in revenge for the September 11 attacks .

[ 136 ] Even after no Iraqi weapons of mass destruction were found, he supported theories that they had existed.

[ 136 ] On the Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse scandal, Limbaugh said, "This is no different than what happens at the Skull and Bones initiation ... And we're going to ruin people's lives over it and we're going to hamper our military effort, and then we are going to really hammer them because they had a good time." [ 137 ] [ 138 ] Speaking at the 2009 Conservative Political Action Conference, Limbaugh accused Democratic congressional leaders such as Harry Reid of deliberately undermining the war effort.

[ 139 ] During the 2019–21 Persian Gulf crisis, Limbaugh praised the 2020 Baghdad International Airport drone strike that resulted in the death of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps 's commander Major General Qasem Soleimani , and accused opponents of the strike of supporting Iran over the United States.

[ 140 ] On January 6, 2020, during an interview with President Donald Trump on his show, Limbaugh commended him for the strike.

[ 141 ] Trade In 1993, Limbaugh supported the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), joking in response to claims that it would lead to a transfer of unskilled labor to Mexico that this would leave the United States with only better jobs.

[ 142 ] During a 1993 televised debate against H. Ross Perot over NAFTA, Vice President Al Gore complimented Limbaugh as one of the "distinguished Americans" who pushed NAFTA forward in spite of the intense animosity between Limbaugh and the administration of President Bill Clinton.

[ 143 ] He later became more critical of NAFTA and trade agreements in general, claiming that they had reduced national sovereignty by "subordinating" America to "world tribunals, like the World Trade Organization and the International Criminal Court and this kind of thing." [ 144 ] He also claimed that promises to stem mass migration by invigorating the Latin American economy had failed.

[ 145 ] [ 144 ] He supported a renegotiation of NAFTA and the eventual United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement .

[ 144 ] Limbaugh defended the first Trump tariffs and the China–United States trade war as a legitimate response to predatory Chinese trade practices and its Communist command economy .

[ 146 ] [ 147 ] Barack Obama Further information: Barack Obama citizenship conspiracy theories Rush Limbaugh strongly opposed Barack Obama during the 2008 presidential election . In 2007, his show aired a song called "Barack the Magic Negro".

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] [ 150 ] Limbaugh spread false claims that Obama was a non-citizen not born in the United States.

[ 151 ] Limbaugh predicted that Obama would be unable to win the election.

[ 152 ] On January 16, 2009, Limbaugh commented on the then-upcoming Obama presidency , "I hope he fails." [ 153 ] Limbaugh later said that he wanted to see Obama's policies fail, not the man himself.

[ 154 ] Limbaugh frequently referred to the Obama administration or presidency as regime [ 155 ] or as the Obama regime , or even junta . Speaking of Obama, Limbaugh said, "He's my president, he's a human being, and his ideas and policies are what count for me." [ 153 ] Limbaugh later discouraged efforts to impeach Barack Obama as politically unrealistic.

[ 156 ] Limbaugh accused Obama of using his race to prevent criticism of his policies, and said he was successful in his first year in office only because conservative members of the 111th Congress feared accusations of racism .

[ 157 ] [ 158 ] Limbaugh featured a recurring skit in which his colleague James Golden , who described himself as an "African-American-in-good-standing-and-certified-black-enough-to-criticize-Obama guy", appeared in a cameo as the "Official EIB Obama Criticizer".

[ 159 ] Limbaugh blamed Obama's foreign policy , including the withdrawal of U.S. troops from Iraq , for allowing the rise of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant .

[ 160 ] Limbaugh also claimed that the 2012 Benghazi attack occurred due to a secret arms trafficking operation to the Syrian opposition authorized by Obama and coordinated by Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens , speculating that the 2016 Democratic National Committee email leak would reveal evidence of it.

[ 161 ] Limbaugh also criticized the Russian reset , viewing Vladimir Putin 's rule in the Russian Federation as a thinly veiled continuation of the Soviet Union and Marxism–Leninism .

[ 28 ] He was also critical of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action , including of Obama's decision to ratify it as an executive agreement , and claimed that it was used as a pretext for surveillance against Obama's political opponents.

[ 162 ] Limbaugh argued that side agreements of the JCPOA limited transparency and would obligate the United States to militarily defend Iran against an Israeli offensive, including a preemptive strike to prevent nuclear weapons development.

[ 163 ] During the West African Ebola virus epidemic , Limbaugh blamed Obama for allowing the spread of the disease to the United States in 2014, claiming that he should have stopped air travel to West Africa.

[ 164 ] [ better source needed ] He claimed that both the media and the government, including the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , deliberately downplayed its symptoms, expressing skepticism over the scientific consensus that the disease could be spread only through contact with bodily fluids and was not aerosol transmissible .

[ 165 ] When David Quammen criticized the idea of ending air travel to West Africa by pointing out that Liberia was founded due to slavery in the United States on Anderson Cooper 360° , Limbaugh suggested in response that the Obama administration was deliberately allowing Ebola to be transmitted to the United States due to its guilt over slavery, stating "People at the highest levels of our government say 'Why, why shouldn't we get it? Why should only those three nations in Africa get it? We're no better than they are.' And they have this attitude, 'Well, if they have it in Africa, by God, we deserve to get it, because they're in Africa because of us and because of slavery.'" [ 166 ] [ 167 ] [ 168 ] Limbaugh joked that the 2010 eruptions of Eyjafjallajökull were God's response to the Affordable Care Act being passed.

[ 169 ] [ 170 ] Relationship with Donald Trump Limbaugh with President Donald Trump at the Trump International Golf Club in 2019 Limbaugh was consistently supportive of the candidacy and first presidency of Donald Trump , although he endorsed Ted Cruz during the 2016 Republican Party presidential primaries and took issue with Trump's treatment of Cruz.

[ 171 ] Limbaugh later criticized Cruz's hesitance to endorse Trump after his nomination at the 2016 Republican National Convention , comparing it to Ted Kennedy 's lukewarm support of Jimmy Carter at the 1980 Democratic National Convention .

[ 172 ] After the election he became supportive of deep-state conspiracy theories , claiming that the United States had entered a "Cold Civil War" in which the Democratic Party was attempting to illegitimately overturn the election results and that it was part of a trend of Democrats contesting elections beginning with the 2000 Florida election recount intended to eventually eliminate free elections in the United States.

[ 173 ] [ 174 ] [ 175 ] In December 2018, Limbaugh criticized Trump for preparing to accept a continuing resolution that would fund the government through February 8, 2019, but included no funding for a border wall on the Mexico–United States border , a campaign promise repeatedly emphasized by Trump.

[ 176 ] Trump would subsequently make a surprise telephone call to Limbaugh announcing his intent to veto the bill, a decision that would lead to the 2018–19 United States federal government shutdown .

[ 177 ] Limbaugh would go on to support the shutdown, stating, "We have a president keeping promises left and right. And isn't it interesting to see how trivial Washington thinks that is?" [ 178 ] [ 179 ] After Trump declared the National Emergency Concerning the Southern Border of the United States and the 116th Congress failed in its attempt to override it, Limbaugh called on him to completely close the border with Mexico.

[ 180 ] Limbaugh was dismissive of controversies over myriad [ 181 ] suspicious links between Trump associates and Russian officials and spies . He claimed that the FBI investigations of Michael Flynn and Paul Manafort , as well as the subsequent Special Counsel investigation directed by Robert Mueller , were orchestrated by Barack Obama and the Democratic Party to undermine the legitimacy of Trump's presidency, constituting an illegal coup d'état .

[ 182 ] [ 183 ] Limbaugh claimed that George Papadopoulos was entrapped by the FBI, which he claimed Joseph Mifsud was an informant for, through Stefan Halper as part of an "insurance policy" against Trump's election by the Five Eyes intelligence alliance.

[ 184 ] Limbaugh advocated a full presidential pardon for all suspects indicted or convicted by the investigation.

[ 180 ] After the release of the Mueller report , he disputed its conclusion that WikiLeaks obtained the Democratic National Committee's emails from the Russian government and its depiction of Donald Trump Jr.

's Trump Tower meeting .

[ 185 ] He claimed that allegations of obstruction of justice were leveled at Trump due to the Report's conclusion that Trump did not directly collude with Russian officials, and that Trump's intent to fire Mueller and Attorney General Jeff Sessions was legitimate.

[ 183 ] Limbaugh supported the Presidential Advisory Commission on Election Integrity as well as Trump's claims that he lost the popular vote due to voter impersonation by illegal immigrants .

[ 186 ] After the House of Representatives commenced a formal impeachment inquiry against President Trump due to the scandal over a 2019 telephone call to Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy , pressuring the Ukrainian government to prosecute 2020 Democratic primary candidate Joe Biden shortly after a freeze of military aid , Limbaugh argued that the two events were unrelated since Trump had made a decision to withhold military funds a month in advance. He additionally claimed that Trump's desire for the Ukrainian government to prosecute Biden was legally justified by a 1999 mutual legal assistance treaty with Ukraine and "was following the law to the letter when it comes to unearthing the long-standing corruption that has swirled in Ukraine and allegedly involves powerful Democrats like Joe Biden." [ 173 ] [ 187 ] Alleging false flag attacks Limbaugh claimed that the October 2018 United States mail bombing attempts were perpetuated as a false flag operation to draw public attention away from Central American migrant caravans .

[ 188 ] [ 189 ] He reiterated these claims two weeks after the arrest of the primary suspect Cesar Sayoc , a registered Republican .

[ 190 ] [ 191 ] On his show, Limbaugh said that the Christchurch mosque shootings of March 2019 may have been a false-flag operation. Limbaugh described "an ongoing theory" that the shooter was actually "a leftist" trying to smear the right. Despite providing no source or evidence, Limbaugh continued: "you can't immediately discount this. The left is this insane, they are this crazy." [ 192 ] [ 193 ] Controversies and inaccuracies Comedian Al Franken , who later became a Senator, wrote a satirical 1996 book, Rush Limbaugh Is a Big Fat Idiot and Other Observations , in which he accused Limbaugh of distorting facts to serve his own political biases.

[ 43 ] Of Limbaugh's controversial statements and allegations they have investigated, Politifact has rated 84% as ranging from "Mostly False" to "Pants On Fire" (signifying false statements that cannot be reasonably assessed as merely errors), with 5% of Limbaugh's contested statements rising to the level of "Mostly True" and 0% rated "True".

[ 194 ] These debunked allegations by Limbaugh include suggestions that the existence of gorillas disproves the theory of evolution, that Ted Kennedy sent a letter to Soviet General Secretary Yuri Andropov seeking to undercut President Reagan , that a recent lack of hurricanes disproves climate change, and that President Obama wanted to mandate circumcision .

[ 195 ] [ 196 ] [ 197 ] [ 198 ] Hu Jintao Limbaugh was heavily criticized for mocking Hu Jintao , then the General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party and paramount leader of the People's Republic of China , and the Chinese language during an episode. After proceeding to label Hu as a "Chicom dictator", Limbaugh mocked the Chinese language , primarily using words like ching chong .

[ 199 ] [ 200 ] Joseph Kony On October 14, 2011, Limbaugh questioned the U.S. Armed Forces initiative against Joseph Kony and his Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), based on the assumption that they were Christians.

[ 201 ] "They are fighting the Muslims in Sudan . And Obama has sent troops, United States troops to remove them from the battlefield, which means kill them." [ 202 ] Upon learning about the accusations leveled against Kony, which included kidnapping whole schools of young children for use as child soldiers, Limbaugh stated that he would research the group.

[ 203 ] [ 204 ] [ 205 ] Deepwater Horizon In 2010, after the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , Limbaugh speculated on his show that eco-terrorists deliberately destroyed the oil well to justify President Obama's deepwater drilling moratorium .

[ 206 ] [ 207 ] [ 208 ] Unite the Right After the white supremacist Unite the Right rally , in which a counter-protester was murdered in the Charlottesville car attack , Limbaugh claimed that the violence had been provoked by Black Lives Matter activists, Antifa , and Robert Creamer . He also claimed without evidence that the police response had been deliberately restrained by Terry McAuliffe as a botched attempt to start a presidential bid in the 2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries , and that it was part of a campaign by "international financiers" such as George Soros to start a Second American Civil War to remove its status as a global superpower .

[ 209 ] Chelsea Clinton During the Clinton administration, while taping his television program, Limbaugh referred to media coverage of Socks , the Clintons' cat. He then stated, "But did you know there is also a White House dog?" and presented a picture of Chelsea Clinton who was 13 years old at the time.

[ 210 ] [ 211 ] Michael J. Fox In October 2006, Limbaugh said Michael J. Fox , who has Parkinson's disease , had exaggerated the effects of his disability in a political TV advertisement advocating for funding of stem cell research .

[ 212 ] Limbaugh said that Fox in the ad had been "shameless" in "moving all around and shaking", and that Fox had not taken "his medication or he's acting, one of the two".

[ 213 ] Fox said "the irony of it is I was too medicated", [ 214 ] adding that there was no way to predict how his symptoms would manifest. Limbaugh said he would apologize to Fox "bigly, hugely ... if I am wrong in characterizing his behavior on this commercial as an act." [ 215 ] In 2012, Fox said Limbaugh in 2006 had acted on "bullying instincts" when "he said I faked it. I didn't fake it.", and said Limbaugh's goal was to have him marginalized and shut down for his stem cell stance.

[ 216 ] Phony soldiers In 2007, Media Matters reported that Limbaugh had categorized Iraq War veterans opposed to the war as "the phony soldiers". Limbaugh later said that he was speaking of Jesse MacBeth , a soldier who falsely claimed to have been decorated for valor but, in fact, had never seen combat. Limbaugh said Media Matters was trying to smear him with out-of-context and selectively edited comments.

[ 217 ] After Limbaugh published what he claimed was the entire transcript of phony soldiers discussion, Media Matters said that over a minute and 30 seconds of the transcript was omitted without "notation or ellipsis to indicate that there is, in fact, a break in the transcript." [ 218 ] [ 219 ] Limbaugh said during the minute and a half gap Media Matters had pointed out, he was waiting for relevant ABC News copy on the topic, and the transcript and audio edits were "for space and relevance reasons, not to hide anything." [ 220 ] Senator Harry Reid and 41 Democrats, including Hillary Clinton, signed a letter asking the CEO of Clear Channel to denounce Limbaugh. Instead, the executive gave the letter to Limbaugh to auction. It raised $2.1 million, at the time an eBay record for an auction item for charity. Limbaugh said he would match the donation and give it to the Marine Corps-Law Enforcement Foundation.

[ 221 ] Bid for ownership of the Rams The NFL team moved to St. Louis, Missouri , and Limbaugh wanted to be a partial owner, but in October 2009, the group that planned to buy the Rams , dropped him.

[ 222 ] Limbaugh blamed Al Sharpton and Jesse Jackson , among others, for his bid failure.

[ 223 ] Sandra Fluke Main article: Rush Limbaugh–Sandra Fluke controversy On February 29, 2012, Limbaugh, while talking about contraceptive mandates , included remarks about law student Sandra Fluke as a "slut" and "prostitute".

[ 224 ] [ 225 ] Limbaugh was commenting on Fluke's speech the previous week to House Democrats in support of mandating insurance coverage for contraceptives . Limbaugh made numerous similar statements over the next two days, leading to the loss of 45 [ 226 ] to "more than 100" [ 227 ] local and national sponsors and Limbaugh's apology on his show for some of his comments. Susan MacMillan Emry co-organized a public relations campaign called Rock the Slut Vote as a response to Limbaugh's remarks.

[ 228 ] COVID-19 pandemic in the United States Main article: Misinformation related to the COVID-19 pandemic During the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States , Limbaugh asserted that the virus was the common cold .

[ 229 ] Limbaugh said on his radio show on February 24, 2020, "I'm dead right on this. The coronavirus is the common cold, folks," alleging it was being "weaponized" to bring down Trump.

[ 230 ] Limbaugh's statement was called "wildly irresponsible" by The Washington Post .

[ 231 ] Charitable work Leukemia and lymphoma telethon From 1990 until his death, Limbaugh held an annual fundraising telethon called the "EIB Cure-a-Thon" [ 232 ] for the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society.

[ 233 ] In 2006, the EIB Cure-a-Thon conducted its 16th annual telethon, raising $1.7 million, [ 234 ] totaling over $15 million since the first cure-a-thon.

[ 235 ] According to Leukemia and Lymphoma Society annual reports, Limbaugh personally contributed between $100,000 and $499,999 from 2000 to 2005 and in 2007, [ 236 ] and Limbaugh said that he contributed around $250,000 in 2003, 2004, and 2005.

[ 237 ] The Society's 2006 annual report placed him in the $500,000 to $999,999 category.

[ 236 ] Limbaugh donated $320,000 during the 2007 Cure-a-Thon, [ 238 ] which the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society reported had raised $3.1 million.

[ 239 ] On his radio program April 18, 2008, Limbaugh pledged $400,000 to the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society after being challenged by two listeners to increase his initial pledge of $300,000.

[ 240 ] Marine Corps–Law Enforcement Foundation Limbaugh conducted an annual drive to help the Marine Corps–Law Enforcement Foundation collect contributions to provide scholarships for children of Marines and law enforcement officers and agents who have died in the line of duty.

[ 241 ] [ 242 ] The foundation was the beneficiary of a record $2.1 million eBay auction in October 2007 after Limbaugh listed for sale a letter critical of him signed by 41 Democratic senators; he pledged to match the selling price.

[ 243 ] With the founding of his and his wife's company Two if by Tea, they pledged to donate at least $100,000 to the MC–LEF beginning in June 2011.

[ 244 ] Tunnel to Towers Foundation Main article: Tunnel to Towers Foundation In July 2019, Nike announced a special Fourth of July edition of their Air Max 1 Quick Strike sneaker that featured the thirteen-star Betsy Ross flag . The company withdrew the sneaker after their spokesman Colin Kaepernick raised concerns that the symbol represented an era of black enslavement.

[ 245 ] In response Limbaugh's radio program introduced a t-shirt imprinted "Stand up for Betsy Ross " with sale proceeds to benefit the Tunnel to Towers Foundation. As of December 2019 [update] , the sales have earned over US$5 million for the foundation.

[ 246 ] Published works In 1992, Limbaugh published his first book, The Way Things Ought to Be , followed by See, I Told You So , the following year. Both titles were number one on The New York Times Best Seller list for 24 weeks.

[ 247 ] His first book was dictated by himself, and transcribed and edited by Wall Street Journal writer John Fund .

[ 248 ] In 2013, Limbaugh authored his first children's book, entitled Rush Revere and the Brave Pilgrims: Time-Travel with Exceptional Americans . He received the Author of the Year Award from the Children's Book Council for this work.

[ 249 ] Limbaugh's second children's book was released the following year, entitled Rush Revere and the First Patriots: Time-Travel with Exceptional Americans . This book was nominated as an author-of-the year finalist for the annual Children's and Teen Choice Book Awards.

[ 250 ] Limbaugh's third children's book was released later this same year, written with his wife Kathryn and entitled Rush Revere and the American Revolution . The Limbaughs dedicated this to the U.S. military and their families.

[ 251 ] The Way Things Ought to Be , Pocket Books, October 1, 1992, ISBN 978-0671751456 See I Told You So , November 1, 1993, Atria, ISBN 978-0671871208 Rush Revere and the Brave Pilgrims: Time-Travel Adventures With Exceptional Americans , Threshold Editions, October 29, 2013, ISBN 978-1476755861 Rush Revere and the First Patriots: Time-Travel Adventures With Exceptional Americans , Threshold Editions, March 11, 2014, ISBN 978-1476755885 Rush Revere and the American Revolution: Time-Travel Adventures With Exceptional Americans , Threshold Editions, October 28, 2014, ISBN 978-1476789873 Rush Revere and the Star-Spangled Banner: Time-Travel Adventures With Exceptional Americans , Threshold Editions, October 27, 2015, ISBN 978-1476789880 Rush Revere and the Presidency: Time-Travel Adventures With Exceptional Americans , Threshold Editions, November 22, 2016, ISBN 978-1501156892 Personal life Limbaugh was raised and considered himself a Methodist .

He was married four times and divorced three times. He did not have any children.

[ 252 ] He was first married at the age of 26 to Roxy Maxine McNeely, a sales secretary at radio station WHB in Kansas City, Missouri. The couple married at the Centenary United Methodist Church in Limbaugh's hometown of Cape Girardeau on September 24, 1977.

[ 253 ] McNeely filed for divorce in March 1980, citing "incompatibility". They were formally divorced on July 10, 1980.

[ 5 ] In 1983, Limbaugh married Michelle Sixta, a college student and usherette at the Kansas City Royals Stadium Club. They divorced in 1990, and she remarried the following year.

[ 5 ] On May 27, 1994, Limbaugh married Marta Fitzgerald, a 35-year-old aerobics instructor whom he met on the online service CompuServe in 1990.

[ 252 ] They married at the house of U.S. Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas , who officiated.

[ 254 ] The couple separated on June 11, 2004.

[ 47 ] Limbaugh announced his divorce on the air. It was finalized in December 2004.

[ 255 ] In September 2004, Limbaugh became romantically involved with then- CNN news anchor Daryn Kagan ; the relationship ended in February 2006.

[ 256 ] Limbaugh lived in Palm Beach from 1996 until his death in 2021. A friend recalls that Limbaugh "fell in love with Palm Beach ... after visiting her over Memorial Day weekend in 1995." [ 257 ] He dated Kathryn Rogers, a party planner from Florida, for three years; [ 258 ] the couple married on June 5, 2010.

[ 259 ] [ 260 ] At the wedding reception following the ceremony, Elton John entertained the wedding guests for a reported $1 million fee; however, Limbaugh denied that the $1 million figure was accurate on his September 7, 2010, radio show.

[ 261 ] [ 262 ] Through a holding company , KARHL Holdings (KARHL meaning "Kathryn and Rush Hudson Limbaugh"), Limbaugh launched a line of bottled iced tea beverages in 2011.

[ 263 ] The brand name "Two if by Tea" was a play on the line from Henry Wadsworth Longfellow 's " Paul Revere's Ride ", "one if by land, two if by sea". Production of the tea was put on hold in 2018 with a statement that "Due to rising manufacturing and shipping costs, we did not feel it was right to pass this on to our customers.".

[ 264 ] Prescription drug addiction On October 3, 2003, the National Enquirer reported that Limbaugh was being investigated for illegally obtaining the prescription drugs oxycodone and hydrocodone . Other news outlets quickly confirmed the investigation.

[ 265 ] He admitted to listeners on his radio show on October 10, 2003, that he was addicted to prescription painkillers and stated that he would enter inpatient treatment for 30 days, immediately after the broadcast.

[ 266 ] Limbaugh stated his addiction to painkillers resulted from several years of severe back pain heightened by a botched surgery intended to correct those problems.

[ 267 ] [ 268 ] A subsequent investigation into whether Limbaugh had violated Florida's doctor shopping laws was launched by the Palm Beach State Attorney , which raised privacy issues when investigators seized Limbaugh's private medical records looking for evidence of crimes.

Roy Black , one of Limbaugh's attorneys, stated that "Rush Limbaugh was singled out for prosecution because of who he is. We believe the state attorney's office is applying a double standard." [ 269 ] On November 9, 2005, following two years of investigations, Assistant State Attorney James L. Martz requested that the court set aside Limbaugh's doctor–patient confidentiality rights and allow the state to question his physicians.

[ 270 ] Limbaugh's attorney opposed the prosecutor's efforts to interview his doctors on the basis of patient privacy rights, and argued that the prosecutor had violated Limbaugh's Fourth Amendment rights by illegally seizing his medical records. The American Civil Liberties Union issued a statement in agreement and filed an amicus curiae brief in support of Limbaugh.

[ 271 ] [ 272 ] On December 12, 2005, Judge David F. Crow delivered a ruling prohibiting the State of Florida from questioning Limbaugh's physicians about "the medical condition of the patient and any information disclosed to the health care practitioner by the patient in the course of the care and treatment of the patient." [ 273 ] On April 28, 2006, a warrant was issued for his arrest on the charge of doctor shopping. According to Teri Barbera, spokeswoman for the sheriff, during his arrest, Limbaugh was booked , photographed, and fingerprinted, but not handcuffed. He was then released after about an hour on $3,000 bail.

[ 274 ] [ 275 ] [ 276 ] After his surrender, he filed a "not guilty" plea to the charge. Prosecutors explained that the charges were brought after they discovered he received about 2,000 painkillers, prescribed by four doctors in six months, at a pharmacy near his Palm Beach mansion. In 2009, after three years of prolonged discussion regarding a settlement, prosecutors agreed to drop the charge if Limbaugh paid $30,000 to defray the cost of the investigation, completed an 18-month therapy regimen with his physician, submitted to random drug testing , and gave up his right to own a firearm for eighteen months.

[ 277 ] Limbaugh agreed to the settlement, though he continued to maintain his innocence of doctor shopping and asserted that the state's offer resulted from a lack of evidence supporting the charge.

[ 278 ] Before his addiction became known, Limbaugh had condemned illegal drug use on his television program, stating that "Drug use, some might say, is destroying this country ... And so if people are violating the law by doing drugs, they ought to be accused and they ought to be convicted and they ought to be sent up." [ 267 ] [ 274 ] Viagra incident In June 2006, Limbaugh was detained by drug enforcement agents at Palm Beach International Airport .

[ 279 ] Customs officials confiscated Viagra from Limbaugh's luggage as he was returning from the Dominican Republic .

[ 280 ] The prescription was not in Limbaugh's name.

[ 279 ] After he was released with no charges filed, Limbaugh joked about the incident on his radio show, claiming that he got the Viagra at the Clinton Library and was told they were blue M&M's . He also stated that "I had a great time in the Dominican Republic. Wish I could tell you about it." [ 279 ] Health problems and death Limbaugh described himself as being "100 percent, totally deaf".

[ 281 ] In 2001, he announced that he had lost most of his ability to hear: "I cannot hear television. I cannot hear music. I am, for all practical purposes, deaf –  and it's happened in three months." He said that the condition was not genetic.

[ 282 ] On December 19, 2001, doctors at the House Ear Clinic in Los Angeles were able to successfully restore a measure of his hearing through cochlear implant surgery. Limbaugh received a Clarion CII Bionic Ear.

[ 283 ] When questioned whether Limbaugh's sudden hearing loss was caused by his addiction to opioids, his cochlear implant doctor, otolaryngologist Jennifer Derebery, said that it was possible, but that there is no way to know for sure without performing tests that would destroy Limbaugh's hearing completely. "We don't know why some people, but apparently not most, who take large doses may lose their hearing." [ 284 ] In 2005, Limbaugh was forced to undergo "tuning" due to an "eye twitch", an apparent side-effect of cochlear implants.

[ 285 ] On December 30, 2009, while vacationing in Honolulu , Hawaii, Limbaugh was admitted to Queen's Medical Center with intense chest pains . His doctors attributed the pain to angina pectoris .

[ 286 ] On April 8, 2014, on his radio program, Limbaugh announced his decision to 'go bilateral'. "I'm going to get an implant on the right side", he said.

[ 287 ] After bilateral tuning, there was a 100% improvement. "Coming from total deafness, it is miraculous! How can you not believe in God?", Limbaugh said in his national daily broadcast.

[ 288 ] Limbaugh, a cigar and former cigarette smoker, [ 289 ] was diagnosed with advanced lung cancer on January 20, 2020, after first experiencing shortness of breath on January 12.

[ 290 ] He had previously downplayed the link between smoking and cancer deaths, arguing that it "takes 50 years to kill people, if it does." [ 289 ] [ 291 ] He announced his diagnosis during his radio show on February 3. He advised he would miss airtime to undergo treatment, and that he would try to continue the program "as normally and competently" as he could.

[ 292 ] On October 20, 2020, Limbaugh announced that treatment had been ineffectual at containing the cancer, that his diagnosis was terminal , and that he had been given a time frame on when he should expect to die.

[ 293 ] In his final broadcast of 2020, he said "I wasn't expected to make it to October, and then to November, and then to December. And yet, here I am, and today, got some problems, but I'm feeling pretty good today." [ 294 ] Limbaugh made his last radio broadcast on February 2, 2021. He died on February 17, at the age of 70. According to his wife, Kathryn Rogers Limbaugh, his death was attributed to complications of his lung cancer.

[ 294 ] Governor Ron DeSantis directed flags in the state of Florida be lowered to half-staff on the date of his interment.

[ 295 ] Limbaugh was interred at the Bellefontaine Cemetery in St. Louis, Missouri .

[ 296 ] Influence and legacy Limbaugh after being awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2020 Limbaugh was widely recognized as one of the leading voices of the conservative movement in the United States, beginning in the 1990s. Former president Ronald Reagan thanked him in a 1992 letter, giving him credit "for all you're doing to promote Republican and conservative principles ... [and] you have become the Number One voice for conservatism in our Country." [ 297 ] [ 298 ] In 1994, Republicans in the U.S. House of Representatives made Limbaugh an honorary member.

[ 40 ] From 1994, Limbaugh served as the inspiration for the character of Birch Barlow , a conservative radio talk show host on The Simpsons .

[ 299 ] In 1995, Limbaugh was profiled on the PBS series Frontline in a one-hour documentary called "Rush Limbaugh's America". Limbaugh refused to be interviewed, but his mother, brother, and many Republican supporters took part, as well as critics and opponents.

[ 300 ] By the 1990s, Limbaugh had become known for his love of cigars , saying, "I think cigars are just a tremendous addition to the enjoyment of life." [ 301 ] During his syndicated television program from 1992 to 1996, he also became known for wearing distinctive neckties . In response to viewer interest, Limbaugh launched a series of ties [ 302 ] designed primarily by his then-wife Marta.

[ 44 ] Limbaugh was awarded the Marconi Radio Award for Syndicated Radio Personality of the Year by the National Association of Broadcasters five times: 1992, 1995, 2000, 2005, and 2014.

[ 303 ] [ 304 ] He was inducted into the National Radio Hall of Fame in 1993 and the National Association of Broadcasters Hall of Fame in 1998.

[ 305 ] [ 306 ] By 2001, he inked a US$ 285 million contract for eight years, which was renewed in 2008 for another eight years at $400 million.

[ 307 ] By 2017, Limbaugh was the second-highest-paid radio host in the United States, earning an annual salary of $84 million, second only to Howard Stern .

[ 308 ] In 2002, Talkers Magazine ranked him as the greatest-ever radio talk show host; [ 309 ] in 2017, he was the most-listened-to radio host in the United States, with 14 million listeners.

[ 310 ] Limbaugh is given much of the credit for having revived AM radio at a time when most people had switched to FM .

[ 311 ] Conservative magazine Human Events announced Limbaugh as their 2007 Man of the Year.

[ 312 ] Later that same year, Barbara Walters featured Limbaugh as one of the most fascinating people of the year in a special that aired on December 4, 2008.

[ 313 ] On February 28, 2009, following his self-described "first address to the nation" lasting 90 minutes, carried live on CNN and Fox News and recorded for C-SPAN , Limbaugh received CPAC 's "Defender of the Constitution Award", a document signed by Benjamin Franklin , given to someone "who has stood up for the First Amendment ... Rush Limbaugh is for America, exactly what Benjamin Franklin did for the Founding Fathers ... the only way we will be successful is if we listen to Rush Limbaugh", reads the citation.

[ 314 ] Limbaugh (left) next to his bust at the Hall of Famous Missourians in 2012 In his 2010 book, Rush Limbaugh: An Army of One , Ze'ev Chafets cited Limbaugh as "the brains and the spirit behind" the Republican Party's resurgence in the 2010 midterm elections in the wake of the election of President Obama .

[ 315 ] Chafets pointed, among others, to Sen.

Arlen Specter 's defeat, after being labeled by Limbaugh as a " Republican in Name Only ", and to Sarah Palin , whose "biggest current applause line –  Republicans are not just the party of no, but the party of hell no –  came courtesy of Mr. Limbaugh." The author continued with ..."Limbaugh has argued the 'party-of-no' conservative course for the Republicans vigorously, notably since six weeks after Obama's inauguration, and has been fundamental to, and encouraging to, the more prominently noted Tea Party movement ".

[ 316 ] Rush Limbaugh was inducted into the Hall of Famous Missourians on May 14, 2012, in a secret ceremony announced only 20 minutes before it began in order to prevent negative media attention.

[ 317 ] A bronze bust of Limbaugh is on display at the Missouri State Capitol building in Jefferson City , along with 40 other awardees. Limbaugh's bust includes a security camera to prevent vandalism.

[ 318 ] [ 319 ] On February 4, 2020, the day after he announced that he had advanced lung cancer, Limbaugh was a guest of President Donald Trump at the 2020 State of the Union Address , where he was presented with the Presidential Medal of Freedom by Melania Trump .

[ 320 ] Select bibliography Limbaugh, Rush (1992).

The Way Things Ought to Be . New York City: Pocket Books.

ISBN 0-671-75145-X .

Limbaugh, Rush (1993).

See, I Told You So . New York City: Pocket Books.

ISBN 0-671-87120-X .

Limbaugh, Rush (2013).

Rush Revere and the Brave Pilgrims . New York City: Threshold Editions.

ISBN 978-1-4767-5586-1 .

Limbaugh, Rush (2014).

Rush Revere and the First Patriots . New York City: Threshold Editions.

ISBN 978-1-4767-5588-5 .

Limbaugh, Rush (2014).

Rush Revere and the American Revolution . New York City: Threshold Editions.

ISBN 978-1-4767-8987-3 .

Limbaugh, Rush (2015).

Rush Revere and the Star-Spangled Banner . New York City: Threshold Editions.

ISBN 978-1-4767-8988-0 .

Limbaugh, Rush (2016).

Rush Revere and the Presidency . New York City: Threshold Editions.

ISBN 978-1-5011-5689-2 .

References Citations ^ a b Cuccinello, Hayley C. (December 6, 2018).

"The World's Highest-Paid Radio Hosts of 2018" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on February 4, 2021 . Retrieved November 15, 2019 .

^ Wheeler, Brian (March 5, 2012).

"Can Limbaugh survive advertiser boycott?" .

BBC News Magazine .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2020 . Retrieved March 18, 2012 .

Currently hosts USA's highest-rated show, with approximately 15 million listeners.

^ Collins, Kaitlan (February 4, 2020).

"Trump says he will award Rush Limbaugh with Medal of Freedom" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on February 5, 2020 . Retrieved February 4, 2020 .

^ a b "Rush Limbaugh Biography: Radio Talk Show Host (1951–)" .

Biography.com .

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 24, 2020 .

^ a b c d e f Colford 1994 .

^ "Ancestry of Rush Limbaugh" . Wargs.com.

Archived from the original on September 27, 2013 . Retrieved September 22, 2013 .

^ "The loudest limb on the family tree, radio's Rush Limbaugh is the 'big mouth'; branch of a solid old Cape Girardeau family".

St. Louis Post-Dispatch . September 27, 1992.

^ Frankel, Todd (September 10, 2010).

" "Quran-burning" Fla. pastor is Cape Girardeau native, ex-classmate of Rush Limbaugh" .

stltoday.com .

Archived from the original on February 21, 2020 . Retrieved February 10, 2020 .

^ Richard Deitsch (August 7, 2003).

"Q&A with Rush Limbaugh" .

Sports Illustrated . Archived from the original on August 15, 2003 . Retrieved January 7, 2013 .

^ Mikkelson, Barbara; Mikkelson, David P. (October 4, 2007).

"Draft Notice" .

Military . Snopes.com . Retrieved January 5, 2013 .

^ "Boys State" . www.al291.com . Retrieved February 24, 2022 .

^ "Rush Limbaugh Gives Sean a Rare Interview" .

Fox News Channel . October 19, 2005.

Archived from the original on December 21, 2012 . Retrieved January 14, 2006 .

^ a b c d e Grossberger, Lewis (December 16, 1990).

"The Rush Hours" .

The New York Times Magazine .

Archived from the original on October 16, 2019 . Retrieved October 16, 2019 .

^ "Rush is Always Right." USA Weekend , January 24–26, 1992, p. 7 ^ "Interview with Zev Chafets, Author of Rush Limbaugh" .

All Right Magazine . August 3, 2010. Archived from the original on April 13, 2012 . Retrieved May 20, 2013 .

^ Chafets 2010 , p. 32.

^ Colford 1994 , p. 22, 24–25.

^ a b Chafets 2010 , p. 35.

^ Colford 1994 , p. 32.

^ "Login" .

Rush Limbaugh . Archived from the original on July 28, 2009.

^ "Transcript of Rush Limbaugh's Address at CPAC" .

Fox News . March 1, 2009. Archived from the original on October 3, 2013 . Retrieved September 22, 2013 .

^ Harlow, John (February 6, 2011).

"Fanatics brave cold for titanic Super Bowl contest between Steelers and Packers" .

The Australian . Archived from the original on June 7, 2013 . Retrieved January 25, 2013 .

^ Colford 1994 , p. 34, 35.

^ Colford 1994 , p. 40, 42–43.

^ Colford 1994 , p. 43.

^ Colford 1994 , p. 45–46.

^ Toma, George; Goforth, Alan; Brett, George (2004).

Nitty gritty dirt man . SportsPublishingLLC.com. p. 164.

ISBN 978-1-58261-646-9 .

Archived from the original on February 17, 2021 . Retrieved October 16, 2020 .

^ a b c "An Explanation of American Exceptionalism for Vladimir Putin and Barack Obama" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on May 2, 2019 . Retrieved May 1, 2019 .

^ Colford 1994 , p. 60.

^ Colford 1994 , p. 69.

^ Limbaugh 1992 , p. 30.

^ Henninger, Daniel (April 29, 2005).

"Rush to Victory" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on April 29, 2005.

^ a b Limbaugh 1992 , p. 6-14.

^ Chafets 2010 , p. 44.

^ "WOR 710 Announces All New Programming Line-up for 2014" .

businesswire.com . Business Wire, Inc. December 9, 2013.

Archived from the original on July 28, 2020 . Retrieved February 10, 2020 .

^ a b Kramer, Staci D. (October 30, 1992).

"The Gospel According to Rush" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved June 7, 2022 .

^ a b Yorke, Jeffrey (June 9, 1992).

"Limbaugh, Bush's White House Guest" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved June 7, 2022 .

^ Fallows, James (May 1, 1994).

"Talent on Loan from the GOP" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved June 7, 2022 .

^ Kruse, Michael (March 2015).

"Jeb's Talk Radio Problem" .

Politico Magazine . Retrieved June 7, 2022 .

^ a b c Seelye, Katherine Q. (December 12, 1994).

"Republicans Get a Pep Talk From Rush Limbaugh" .

The New York Times . pp. A16.

Archived from the original on July 30, 2018 . Retrieved August 28, 2018 .

^ Pugmire, Genelle (May 1, 1996).

"Firm Affords Direct Connection To Net Goods" .

Deseret News .

Archived from the original on February 19, 2021 . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

^ Walke, Paul (April 16, 1996).

"Limbaugh releases 2nd tie collection" .

The Daily Universe .

Archived from the original on October 12, 2015 . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

^ a b Franken, Al (1999).

Rush Limbaugh is a Big Fat Idiot and Other Observations . Dell.

ISBN 978-0-440-50864-9 .

Archived from the original on March 29, 2021 . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

^ a b Vinciguerra, Thomas (August 4, 1996).

"No Talk Show, But a Loud Tie" .

The New York Times . p. 43.

Archived from the original on November 11, 2020 . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

^ "Right-Wing Southerner Is Rudy's Secret Weapon in Senate Campaign" .

Observer . January 31, 2000.

Archived from the original on June 26, 2013 . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

^ Duncan, Bernadette (June 30, 2016).

Yappy Days: Behind the Scenes with Newsers, Schmoozers, Boozers and Losers . AuthorHouse.

ISBN 978-1-5246-0054-9 .

Archived from the original on March 29, 2021 . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

^ a b McCabe, Scott (June 12, 2004).

"Limbaugh, third wife parting after 10 years" .

The Palm Beach Post . Archived from the original on June 19, 2004 . Retrieved November 4, 2006 .

^ "PHOTOS: Rush Limbaugh Used To Be A Fashion Designer" .

HuffPost . March 6, 2012.

Archived from the original on November 24, 2020 . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

^ Boswell, Susan (December 15, 2018).

"Limbaugh Receives Cochlear Implant" .

The ASHA Leader .

7 : 1– 21.

doi : 10.1044/leader.ftr2.07012002.1 .

ISSN 1085-9586 .

^ https://huffpost.com/us/entry/us_5207860 [ dead link ] ^ "Was Limbaugh Right to Resign from ESPN?" .

Time . October 6, 2003. Archived from the original on August 27, 2013 . Retrieved September 22, 2013 .

^ Peter, King (September 30, 2003).

"Open mouth, insert foot, Limbaugh's comments on McNabb aren't racist, but they are boneheaded" .

Sports Illustrated . Archived from the original on February 6, 2009 . Retrieved March 14, 2009 .

{{ cite magazine }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Barra, Allen (October 2, 2003).

"Rush was Right" .

Slate .

Archived from the original on October 16, 2009 . Retrieved October 10, 2009 .

^ "Limbaugh admits addiction to pain medication" .

CNN . October 10, 2003.

Archived from the original on February 17, 2013 . Retrieved March 18, 2013 .

^ Peter Whoriskey (April 29, 2006).

"Rush Limbaugh Turns Himself In On Fraud Charge In Rx Drug Probe" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 26, 2012 . Retrieved March 18, 2013 .

^ Dave Goldiner (December 31, 2009).

"Rush Limbaugh, conservative radio host, rushed to Hawaiian hospital with chest pains: report" .

New York Daily News .

Archived from the original on June 3, 2013 . Retrieved March 18, 2013 .

^ a b Byers, Dylan (May 5, 2013).

"Rush Limbaugh may leave Cumulus" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on February 12, 2021 . Retrieved February 17, 2021 .

^ Flood, Brian (January 28, 2021).

"Rush Limbaugh: GameStop saga mirrors politics as elites attempt to prevent regular people from benefiting" .

Fox News .

Archived from the original on January 28, 2021 . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

^ Hiaasen, Rob (March 14, 2006).

"WBAL Radio Cancels Rush Limbaugh: Station is First to Drop Show, Wants to Focus on Local News" .

The Baltimore Sun .

Archived from the original on March 3, 2009 . Retrieved March 1, 2009 .

^ "Vital Statistics", U.S. News & World Report, July 30, 2001, p. 7.

^ "The Celebrity 100: #36 Rush Limbaugh" .

Forbes . June 14, 2007. Archived from the original on May 25, 2011.

^ "Zogby poll finds the internet today's most trusted news source" (PDF) .

The IFC Media Project . November 20, 2008.

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 11, 2013 . Retrieved September 22, 2013 .

^ a b Bond, Paul (August 2, 2016).

"Rush Limbaugh Extends Radio Contract for Four More Years" .

The Hollywood Reporter . Los Angeles, California.

Archived from the original on February 19, 2021 . Retrieved August 2, 2016 .

Premiere and iHeartMedia said that in 2016 The Rush Limbaugh Show experienced significant audience growth, including 18 percent in adults 25–54 and 27 percent among women in that age group. Despite efforts among progressive groups like Media Matters for America to discourage advertisers, ad revenue for the show increased 20 percent year-over-year.

^ Stelter, Brian (January 5, 2020).

"Rush Limbaugh renews radio show contract in a 'long-term' deal" .

CNN . Cable News Network.Turner Broadcasting System, Inc.

Archived from the original on January 6, 2020 . Retrieved January 6, 2020 .

^ "Thursday, May 14, 2020" .

TALKERS magazine . May 14, 2020.

Archived from the original on July 22, 2020 . Retrieved July 22, 2020 .

^ Steele, Anne (May 27, 2021).

"WSJ News Exclusive | Rush Limbaugh's Radio Show to be Taken over by Clay Travis and Buck Sexton" .

The Wall Street Journal .

^ "Rush Receives 'Freedom of Speech Award' from Talkers Magazine" . Rushlimbaugh.com. June 6, 2009. Archived from the original on June 12, 2009 . Retrieved March 10, 2010 .

^ "Rush and Roger Ailes Speak at Boy Scouts Awards Dinner" . Rushlimbaugh.com. November 11, 2009. Archived from the original on February 18, 2010 . Retrieved March 10, 2010 .

^ Rush Limbaugh guest-hosts the Pat Sajak show in 1990 on YouTube ^ a b c Gehr, Richard (October 8, 1990). "Mouth At Work".

Newsday . p. 4.

For all his bravado, however, Limbaugh is immensely sensitive to charges of insensitivity. When asked about the racist they-all-look-alike connotation of a statement like `Have you ever noticed how all newspaper composite pictures of wanted criminals resemble Jesse Jackson?` this professional talker from a family of lawyers pleads total innocence.`You may interpret it as that, but I, no, honest-to-God, that's not how I intended it at all. Gee, don't get me in this one. I am the least racist host you'll ever find.` Recalling a stint as an `insult-radio` DJ in Pittsburgh, he admits feeling guilty about, for example, telling a black listener he could not understand to `take that bone out of your nose and call me back.` ^ Sajak, Pat (May 3, 2001).

Larry King Live (TV series).

CNN .

^ Maurstad, Tom (December 20, 1993). "Stern, Limbaugh meet their match; Hosts Leno, Letterman hold their own in war".

The Dallas Morning News . p. 1C.

^ a b Greenbaum, Aaron (February 18, 2021).

"Rush Limbaugh Cameos You Forgot Existed" .

looper.com . Retrieved May 22, 2021 .

^ Limbaugh, Rush (1992).

The Way Things Ought To Be (1 ed.). New York: Pocket Books.

ISBN 067175145X .

^ "Wednesday Quotes: Your Conservative Rock" . RushLimbaugh.com. November 5, 2008. Archived from the original on July 30, 2011 . Retrieved November 9, 2008 .

^ "Get Off the Ledge, Conservatives! We Have Two Battles on Our Hands" . Rushlimbaugh.com. November 6, 2008. Archived from the original on July 30, 2011 . Retrieved November 9, 2008 .

^ "Unconscionable: McCain Staffers Attempting to Destroy Sarah Palin" . RushLimbaugh.com. November 6, 2008. Archived from the original on August 26, 2011 . Retrieved November 9, 2008 .

^ Limbaugh 1992 , p. 3.

^ Rozsa, Matthew (July 22, 2019).

"Rush Limbaugh argues Kamala Harris and Barack Obama can't be considered African-American" .

salon.com . Salon.com, LLC.

Archived from the original on February 11, 2020 . Retrieved February 11, 2020 .

^ "January 19, 2007 transcript" . RushLimbaugh.com. Archived from the original on April 22, 2012 . Retrieved April 3, 2012 .

^ "October 14, 2008 transcript" . RushLimbaugh.com. Archived from the original on January 16, 2011 . Retrieved November 9, 2008 .

^ " 'White guilt'? Forget it: Whites have 'done more to end' slavery than 'any other race,' says Rush Limbaugh" .

NBC News . July 22, 2013.

^ "Sharpton slams Limbaugh, O'Reilly" .

Politico . July 25, 2013.

^ "Trump Threatens to Shut Down the Southern Border" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on May 2, 2019 . Retrieved May 1, 2019 .

^ a b Smith, Talmon Joseph (February 8, 2020).

"Rush Limbaugh in His Own Words (Published 2020)" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 17, 2021 . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

^ "Rush Limbaugh's most outrageous moments in 25 years on the radio" .

NBC News . August 1, 2013.

^ Limbaugh, Rush (April 28, 2021).

"Must Listen! Rush Explains Who Pays Taxes - The Rush Limbaugh Show" .

www.rushlimbaugh.com . Retrieved June 7, 2022 .

^ Limbaugh 1992 , p. 39-42.

^ "Rush Limbaugh on Corporations" .

www.ontheissues.org . Retrieved June 7, 2022 .

^ Fitts, Ray (March 13, 1988).

"For Rush Limbaugh, bad taste costs no more" .

newspapers.com . Sacramento Bee.

Archived from the original on February 19, 2021 . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

^ "The Way Things Ought to Be, by..." chicagotribune.com . September 26, 1993.

Archived from the original on March 5, 2020 . Retrieved February 11, 2020 .

^ "Rush Limbaugh on VoteMatch" .

ontheissues.org .

Archived from the original on March 5, 2020 . Retrieved February 11, 2020 .

^ Remnick, David (February 20, 1994).

"Day of the Dittohead" .

The Washington Post . p. C1. Archived from the original on September 15, 2021.

^ "A Rush to Judgment on Limbaugh?" .

Los Angeles Times . May 25, 1998. Archived from the original on February 17, 2021.

^ McDonald, Natalie Hope (January 20, 2011).

"Limbaugh Rants About AIDS – Again" .

phillymag.com . Metro Corp.

Archived from the original on July 28, 2020 . Retrieved February 11, 2020 .

^ Ocamb, Karen (November 6, 2018).

" 'Boy Erased' tops office opening" .

Los Angeles Blade . Retrieved September 14, 2021 .

^ "Rush Limbaugh mocked the deaths of AIDS victims to disco music in despicable radio segment" .

PinkNews .

^ "Did Rush Limbaugh's 'AIDS Update' Mock the Deaths of Gay People?" .

Snopes.com . February 17, 2021 . Retrieved February 17, 2021 .

^ "Fact Check: Did Rush Limbaugh Mock AIDS Deaths on His Radio Show?" .

Newsweek . February 18, 2021 . Retrieved November 14, 2022 .

^ a b c "Rush Limbaugh on Civil Rights" .

ontheissues.org .

Archived from the original on May 23, 2019 . Retrieved May 22, 2019 .

^ "The Left Exaggerated AIDS (Global Warming, Anybody?)" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on October 1, 2019 . Retrieved September 29, 2019 .

^ Byers, Dylan (March 28, 2013).

"Rush Limbaugh: Gay marriage 'inevitable' " .

Politico .

Archived from the original on May 19, 2013 . Retrieved September 29, 2019 .

^ "We Lost Once We Modified the Definition of the Word "Marriage" " .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on September 29, 2019 . Retrieved September 29, 2019 .

^ "Why Is Rush Limbaugh So Afraid of Lesbian Farmers?" .

NBC News . August 27, 2016.

^ "Buttigieg hits back: I won't 'take lectures on family values' from Rush Limbaugh" .

NBC News . February 16, 2020.

Archived from the original on February 16, 2020 . Retrieved February 16, 2020 .

^ Sommerfeldt, Chris (October 13, 2016).

"Rush Limbaugh suggested 'the left' is too uptight about sex having to be consensual: 'here come the rape police' " .

nydailynews.com .

New York Daily News .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2020 . Retrieved February 11, 2020 .

^ Mazza, Ed (October 13, 2016).

"Rush Limbaugh Mocks Sexual Consent: 'Here Come The Rape Police' " .

Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on August 7, 2020 . Retrieved February 6, 2020 .

^ Mac McCann (October 13, 2016).

"Rush Limbaugh Says 'Rape Police' Left Cares Too Much About Consent" .

Complex.com .

Archived from the original on August 26, 2018.

^ Taibi, Catherine (September 15, 2014).

"Rush Limbaugh: 'No Means Yes If You Know How To Spot It' " .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on July 28, 2020 . Retrieved February 11, 2020 .

^ Sullivan, Peter (November 10, 2014).

"Rush Limbaugh threatens to sue House Democratic campaign arm" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on August 6, 2020 . Retrieved February 11, 2020 .

^ Farhi, Paul (November 10, 2014).

"Limbaugh threatens to sue DCCC for 'out of context' quotes about sexual consent" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2019 . Retrieved April 27, 2019 .

^ Patten, Dominic (November 10, 2014).

"Rush Limbaugh Defamation Lawsuit Threat "Outlandish", Democrats Say" .

Deadline .

Archived from the original on July 23, 2020 . Retrieved July 23, 2020 .

^ Barron, James (October 11, 2003).

"In Show, Limbaugh Tells of a Pill Habit; Plans to Enter Clinic" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 5, 2020 . Retrieved February 11, 2020 .

^ a b Baker, Bob (November 18, 2003).

"Limbaugh Returns to Air After Stay in Drug Rehab" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on February 10, 2020 . Retrieved February 11, 2020 .

^ "Limbaugh on Drugs" .

FAIR . November–December 2003. Archived from the original on March 8, 2012 . Retrieved March 3, 2012 .

^ "Rush Limbaugh on Drugs" .

On The Issues .

Archived from the original on May 23, 2019 . Retrieved May 22, 2019 .

^ "E-Cig Commercial Reclaims Freedom" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2020 . Retrieved May 22, 2019 .

^ "So we have now the Four Corners of Deceit, and the two universes in which we live. The Universe of Lies, the Universe of Reality" . Rushlimbaugh.com. Archived from the original on November 28, 2009 . Retrieved November 24, 2009 .

^ "Rush Limbaugh" .

On the Issues .

Archived from the original on December 15, 2018.

^ "Global Warming is a Giant Lie: It Explains Liberalism in a Nutshell" .

Rush Limbaugh . RushLimbaugh.com. February 1, 2007. Archived from the original on April 2, 2007.

^ "Study: No Global Warming Acceleration in 23 Years" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on June 3, 2019 . Retrieved June 3, 2019 .

^ "Scientists pan Rush Limbaugh's climate denial" .

PolitiFact .

Archived from the original on June 3, 2019 . Retrieved June 3, 2019 .

^ e.g.

"Idiot Bird Extinct, Future of World at Risk" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show . December 1, 2004. Archived from the original on October 21, 2007.

^ Rush Limbaugh (January 24, 2001).

"Rush Limbaugh on energy & oil" .

Archived from the original on February 7, 2019 . Retrieved February 17, 2019 .

^ "Rush to Timesman: "Kill yourself" " .

Politico . October 20, 2009.

^ "A Caller Explains Cap and Trade" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2020 . Retrieved May 22, 2019 .

^ "ENSORED: The News That Didn't Make the..." Los Angeles Times . June 11, 1995. Archived from the original on July 2, 2025.

^ "Democrats Go Nuts –  And I Love It!" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on May 2, 2019 . Retrieved May 1, 2019 .

^ Margaret Carlson (October 26, 1992).

"An Interview with Rush Limbaugh" .

Time magazine . Archived from the original on August 25, 2013 . Retrieved February 17, 2019 .

^ Rush H. Limbaugh (1992).

The Way Things Ought to Be . Pocket Books. p.

296 .

ISBN 9780671751456 . Archived from the original on January 3, 2014.

^ "Drive-By Media Normalizes Deranged Feminazi March" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on May 8, 2017 . Retrieved June 13, 2017 .

^ Rush H. Limbaugh (1992).

The Way Things Ought to Be . Pocket Books. p.

193 .

ISBN 9780671751456 . Archived from the original on November 11, 2013.

"I prefer to call the most obnoxious feminists what they really are: feminazis. Tom Hazlett, a good friend who is an esteemed and highly regarded professor of economics at the University of California at Davis, coined the term to describe any female who is intolerant of any point of view that challenges militant feminism. I often use it to describe women who are obsessed with perpetuating a modern-day holocaust: abortion." ^ "Rush Limbaugh Gives Liberals the Business, Gets Plenty Himself : Radio: The conservative talk-show host, whose program is nationally syndicated, is a major commercial enterprise" .

Los Angeles Times . November 25, 1989. Archived from the original on February 18, 2021.

^ Limbaugh, Rush (December 16, 1990). "The Way things Ought To Be". New York City: Simon and Schuster . pp.

62– 66.

[ full citation needed ] ^ "Rush: Women turning into 'abortion machines' " .

NBC News . November 7, 2013.

^ a b Wilson, John K. (2011), The most dangerous man in America : Rush Limbaugh's assault on reason , Blackstone Audio, Inc, ISBN 978-1-4417-7930-4 , OCLC 708594171 ^ Sontag, Susan (May 23, 2004).

"Regarding the Torture of Others" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 30, 2010 . Retrieved March 31, 2010 .

^ "Rush: MPs Just 'Blowing Off Steam', Limbaugh: Abuse Story 'Media-Generated': CBS' Meyer Says Beware" .

CBS News . May 6, 2004. Archived from the original on September 27, 2008 . Retrieved November 9, 2008 .

^ "Rush Limbaugh Remarks to Conservatives" .

C-SPAN.org .

Archived from the original on March 5, 2020 . Retrieved May 2, 2019 .

^ "Why the Left Sides with Iranian Terrorists Over America" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on January 12, 2020 . Retrieved January 12, 2020 .

^ "Transcript Quote – Interview: Rush Limbaugh Interviews Donald Trump on the Radio – January 6, 2020" .

Factbase .

Archived from the original on January 12, 2020 . Retrieved January 12, 2020 .

^ "Rush Limbaugh on Free Trade" .

www.ontheissues.org .

Archived from the original on May 23, 2019 . Retrieved May 23, 2019 .

^ "Gore says Perot will gain financially with defeat of NAFTA" .

UPI .

Archived from the original on May 23, 2019 . Retrieved May 23, 2019 .

^ a b c "Didn't They Promise NAFTA Would End Mass Migration?" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on May 23, 2019 . Retrieved May 23, 2019 .

^ "Here's Why I Led with NAFTA Yesterday" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on May 23, 2019 . Retrieved May 23, 2019 .

^ "Why We Must Hang with Trump on Tariffs" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on May 23, 2019 . Retrieved May 23, 2019 .

^ "Trump's Tariffs Are a Negotiation" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on May 23, 2019 . Retrieved May 23, 2019 .

^ "Shock jock unrepentant over derogatory Obama song" .

The Guardian . May 10, 2007.

^ "Limbaugh's snipe targets Obama" .

Chicago Tribune . May 6, 2007.

^ "Limbaugh draws fire on Obama parody" .

Seattle Times . May 6, 2007.

^ McGreal, Chris (July 28, 2009).

"Anti-Barack Obama 'birther movement' gathers steam" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on February 18, 2020 . Retrieved February 11, 2020 .

^ Cramer, Ruby (November 2012).

"Five People Who Thought John McCain Would Win" .

BuzzFeed News .

Archived from the original on March 5, 2020 . Retrieved February 11, 2020 .

^ a b "Limbaugh: I Hope Obama Fails" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show, Transcript . January 16, 2009. Archived from the original on March 26, 2009 . Retrieved March 23, 2009 .

^ Bacon, Perry Jr. (March 4, 2009).

"GOP Seeks Balance With Conservative Icon Limbaugh" .

The Washington Post . p. A01.

Archived from the original on February 7, 2012 . Retrieved February 17, 2019 .

^ "Matthews, Chris; Hardball with Chris Matthews April 5, 2010" .

NBC News . April 6, 2010.

^ Taibi, Catherine (March 21, 2014).

"Rush Limbaugh Considers Obama's Impeachment" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on May 1, 2019 . Retrieved May 1, 2019 .

^ Hensch, Mark (December 8, 2016).

"Limbaugh: Obama's race 'paralyzed this country' " .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on May 1, 2019 . Retrieved May 1, 2019 .

^ Mazza, Ed (February 21, 2017).

"Rush Limbaugh: Obama 'Got Everything He Wanted' Because He's Black" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on May 1, 2019 . Retrieved May 1, 2019 .

^ Friedersdorf, Conor (May 12, 2011).

"Rush Limbaugh Show Mocks Urban Blacks" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on June 3, 2019 . Retrieved June 3, 2019 .

^ "Trump Just Won't Stop Telling the Truth: Obama and Hillary Co-Founded ISIS" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2019 . Retrieved April 28, 2019 .

^ "Did Hillary Run Guns Out of Benghazi?" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2019 . Retrieved April 28, 2019 .

^ "A Review of Obama's Disastrous Iran Deal That Trump Just Saved Us From" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on May 2, 2019 . Retrieved May 2, 2019 .

^ "Obama's Secret Iran Side Deals" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on May 3, 2019 . Retrieved May 2, 2019 .

^ Boguhn, Alexandrea (October 6, 2014).

"Conservative Media Advocate Travel Bans From Ebola-Stricken Countries, Against Experts' Advice" .

mediamatters.org . Media Matters for America.

Archived from the original on January 6, 2020 . Retrieved February 11, 2020 .

^ "Obama's Deadly Ebola Failure" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2019 . Retrieved April 28, 2019 .

^ Stelter, Brian (October 21, 2014).

"Rush Limbaugh thinks 'they' think we all deserve Ebola" .

CNNMoney .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2019 . Retrieved April 28, 2019 .

^ Feuer, Alan (October 18, 2014).

"The Ebola Conspiracy Theories" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on May 1, 2019 . Retrieved May 1, 2019 .

^ Savage, Michael.

"In U.S., Ebola Turns From A Public Health Issue To A Political One" .

NPR.org .

Archived from the original on May 1, 2019 . Retrieved May 1, 2019 .

^ Terkel, Amanda (April 17, 2010).

"Limbaugh: Volcanic eruption in Iceland is God's reaction to health care's passage" .

ThinkProgress . Archived from the original on May 22, 2011 . Retrieved November 22, 2010 .

^ "Fundamental cause & effect" .

Washington Post . May 1, 2010.

^ Haberman, Maggie (December 14, 2015).

"Rush Limbaugh Stands in Ted Cruz's Corner After Attacks by Donald Trump" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on September 6, 2018 . Retrieved February 1, 2019 .

^ "Cruz Couldn't Pull Off a Reagan in '76" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2019 . Retrieved April 28, 2019 .

^ a b "There Is No Whistleblower, Just a Leaker! We're in the Midst of a Cold Civil War" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2019 . Retrieved September 28, 2019 .

^ Ian Schwartz (August 10, 2018).

"Limbaugh: Evidence Of The Left's March Toward Ending Elections" .

Real Clear Politics .

Archived from the original on August 11, 2018 . Retrieved April 28, 2019 .

^ "Evidence of the Left's March Toward Ending Elections" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on May 14, 2019 . Retrieved September 28, 2019 .

^ Schwartz, Jason (December 21, 2018).

"Rush Limbaugh roars back" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on July 28, 2020 . Retrieved February 1, 2019 .

^ Byrnes, Jesse (December 20, 2018).

"Limbaugh: Trump gave word he'll veto any bill without border wall money" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on February 2, 2019 . Retrieved February 1, 2019 .

^ Astor, Maggie; Grynbaum, Michael M. (January 11, 2019).

"On Conservative Media, Qualified Support for Trump on Shutdown" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 13, 2019 . Retrieved February 1, 2019 .

^ "Donald Trump Will Keep His Promise to Secure Our Country" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on January 19, 2019 . Retrieved February 1, 2019 .

^ a b "Close the Southern Border and Pardon Everybody" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on May 3, 2019 . Retrieved May 1, 2019 .

^ Savage, Charlie; Goldman, Adam (May 17, 2023).

"After Years of Political Hype, the Durham Inquiry Failed to Deliver - A dysfunctional investigation led by a Trump-era special counsel illustrates a dilemma about prosecutorial independence and accountability in politically sensitive matters" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 17, 2023 . Retrieved May 17, 2023 .

^ "Barack Obama and His Deep State Operatives Are Attempting to Sabotage the Duly Elected President of the United States" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on November 14, 2018 . Retrieved February 1, 2019 .

^ a b "Mueller Report: No Collusion or Obstruction. Period" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on May 23, 2019 . Retrieved May 23, 2019 .

^ "The Dossier, Papadopoulos and the Insurance Policy" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on May 4, 2019 . Retrieved May 1, 2019 .

^ "Trump Didn't Obstruct Justice, He Tried to Protect the Truth" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on May 23, 2019 . Retrieved May 23, 2019 .

^ "Why Do Democrats Fear a Voter-Fraud Investigation?" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2019 . Retrieved April 28, 2019 .

^ "Why Trump Could Not Have Engaged in a Quid Pro Quo with Ukraine" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2019 . Retrieved September 28, 2019 .

^ Peters, Jeremy W. (October 24, 2018).

"Explosive Devices Add to Climate of Overheated Partisan Rancor" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on December 17, 2018 . Retrieved February 1, 2019 .

^ Onion, Rebecca (October 25, 2018).

"The Far Right Is Claiming That Letter Bombs Are a "Liberal Tactic" But History Shows Equal-Opportunity Terrorism" .

Slate .

Archived from the original on January 16, 2019 . Retrieved February 1, 2019 .

^ "The Attempt to Destroy Donald Trump Has Made Us Suspicious of Everything" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show .

Archived from the original on October 27, 2018 . Retrieved February 2, 2019 .

^ "Ann Coulter, Rush Limbaugh and others stick with conspiracy theories after mail-bomb suspect's arrest" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 2, 2019 . Retrieved February 2, 2019 .

^ Concha, Joe (March 15, 2019).

"Limbaugh suggests without evidence that New Zealand attacker is 'a leftist' " .

The Hill . Retrieved March 16, 2019 .

^ Moritz-Rabson, Daniel.

"Rush Limbaugh Claims New Zealand Mosque Shootings Were False Flag Operation, Offers No Evidence" .

Newsweek .

Archived from the original on March 16, 2019 . Retrieved March 16, 2019 .

^ "Rush Limbaugh's file" .

PolitiFact .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2019 . Retrieved February 17, 2019 .

^ "Say what? Rush Limbaugh wonders why Harambe didn't evolve" .

Archived from the original on November 6, 2018 . Retrieved February 17, 2019 .

^ "Limbaugh: Ted Kennedy undercut Reagan with back-door line to Soviets" .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2018 . Retrieved February 17, 2019 .

^ "Limbaugh: Lack of major hurricanes disproves climate change" .

Archived from the original on August 27, 2018 . Retrieved February 17, 2019 .

^ "Limbaugh wrong that Obama is mandating circumcision" .

Archived from the original on August 27, 2018 . Retrieved February 17, 2019 .

^ "Hu brouhaha: Rush Limbaugh slammed for 'childish' mocking of Chinese leader" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . January 21, 2011 . Retrieved April 27, 2021 .

^ "Rush Limbaugh, sinophone" .

The Economist . January 21, 2011.

^ Grier, Peter (March 9, 2012).

"Why did Rush Limbaugh defend Joseph Kony and Lord's Resistance Army?" .

Christian Science Monitor . The Christian Science Monitor.

Archived from the original on March 5, 2020 . Retrieved February 11, 2020 .

^ Okeowo, Alexis (October 25, 2011).

"OBAMA AND UGANDA: LIMBAUGH'S ARMY" .

newyorker.com .

Archived from the original on August 12, 2020 . Retrieved February 11, 2020 .

^ Thernstrom, Melanie (May 8, 2005).

"Charlotte, Grace, Janet and Caroline Come Home" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 23, 2013 . Retrieved January 11, 2012 .

^ "Obama Invades Uganda, Targets Christians" .

The Rush Limbaugh Show . October 14, 2011.

Archived from the original on October 16, 2011 . Retrieved October 19, 2011 .

^ "Rush Limbaugh Attacked President Obama For 'Targeting' Joseph Kony's 'Christian' LRA" . Mediaite. March 10, 2012.

Archived from the original on October 18, 2012 . Retrieved August 2, 2012 .

^ "Limbaugh, Scientists Square Off on Oil Spill Cleanup" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on November 9, 2020 . Retrieved March 22, 2021 .

^ "Who's to Blame for the Gulf Oil Spill?" .

Time . May 27, 2010.

^ "Maybe the eco-terrorists did it" .

The Ecomonist . May 4, 2010.

^ Chaitin, Daniel (August 19, 2017).

"Rush Limbaugh warns of second civil war after Charlottesville violence" .

Washington Examiner .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2019 . Retrieved April 28, 2019 .

^ Roberts, Roxanne (February 27, 1996).

"16 Candles for Chelsea" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2018 . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

^ Clay-Little, Kathy (June 4, 2010).

"Complaints and anger dominate talk radio" .

Mysa .

Archived from the original on July 2, 2018 . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

^ "Limbaugh Accuses Fox Of Exaggerating Parkinson's Symptoms "He Was Either Off The Medication Or He Was Acting"..." HuffPost . March 28, 2008.

Archived from the original on July 28, 2020 . Retrieved February 11, 2020 .

^ Montgomery, David (October 25, 2006).

"Rush Limbaugh On the Offensive Against Ad With Michael J. Fox" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on January 15, 2010 . Retrieved February 17, 2019 .

^ McNamara, Melissa (October 26, 2006).

"Transcript: Michael J. Fox Interview" .

CBS News .

Archived from the original on October 3, 2016 . Retrieved October 1, 2016 .

^ "Fox Responds To Limbaugh Accusation" .

CBS News .

Archived from the original on October 3, 2013 . Retrieved February 17, 2019 .

^ "Clips From Last Night: Michael J. Fox on Rush Limbaugh; Meredith Vieira and Richard Cohen on living with MS" .

CNN . March 15, 2012. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018 . Retrieved February 17, 2019 .

^ " "Phony Soldiers" Smear Rolls On; The Mad Bomber of Bosnia Attacks" .

rushlimbaugh.com . Archived from the original on March 9, 2017 . Retrieved February 11, 2020 .

^ "Limbaugh falsely recasts "phony soldiers" smear" . Media Matters. September 28, 2007. Archived from the original on July 5, 2010 . Retrieved August 12, 2010 .

^ "Limbaugh selectively edited "phony soldiers" clip, claimed it was "the entire transcript" " . Media Matters. September 28, 2007. Archived from the original on June 16, 2010 . Retrieved August 12, 2010 .

^ "Limbaugh Makes His Case" .

The National Review Online . October 3, 2007. Archived from the original on May 12, 2011 . Retrieved August 16, 2010 .

^ "Limbaugh letter nets $2.1 million on eBay" .

NBC News .

Associated Press . October 19, 2007.

Archived from the original on March 29, 2021 . Retrieved February 20, 2021 .

^ "Limbaugh Dropped From Bid to Buy Rams" .

New York Times . October 14, 2009.

^ "Limbaugh Blasts Critics After Dropping Rams Bid" .

CBS News . October 15, 2009 . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

^ Montopoli, Brian (March 2, 2012).

"Sandra Fluke: Rush Limbaugh wants "to silence women" " .

cbsnews.com . CBS Interactive, Inc.

Archived from the original on February 9, 2020 . Retrieved February 11, 2020 .

^ Memmott, Mark (March 2, 2012).

"Student Is Outraged By Rush Limbaugh Calling Her A 'Slut' And 'Prostitute' " .

NPR . National Public Radio (NPR).

Archived from the original on February 5, 2020 . Retrieved February 11, 2020 .

^ MJ Lee (March 14, 2012).

"Rush Limbaugh loses 45 advertisers" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on August 29, 2012 . Retrieved September 4, 2012 .

^ Zielenziger, David (August 15, 2012).

"Limbaugh Boycott Draws Blood: Cumulus Media Cites 'Drag' In 2Q Revenue" .

International Business Times .

Archived from the original on August 23, 2012 . Retrieved February 17, 2019 .

^ Duerson, Meena Hart.

" 'Rock the Slut Vote' site aims to fight for women's issues in November election" .

New York Daily News .

Archived from the original on July 8, 2018 . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

^ McCarthy, Bill (February 27, 2020).

"Fact-checking Rush Limbaugh's misleading claim that the new coronavirus is "the common cold" " .

PolitiFact . Archived from the original on April 6, 2020 . Retrieved April 7, 2020 .

^ Pengelly, Martin (February 25, 2020).

"Rush Limbaugh: coronavirus a 'common cold' being 'weaponised' against Trump" .

The Guardian . Retrieved August 24, 2020 .

^ Chiu, Allyson (February 25, 2020).

"Rush Limbaugh on coronavirus: 'The common cold' that's being 'weaponized' against Trump" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved August 20, 2020 .

^ "Leukemia & Lymphoma Society Cure-A-Thon Breaks $3 Million Mark" .

Rush Limbaugh . RushLimbaugh.com. April 18, 2011.

Archived from the original on October 25, 2012 . Retrieved August 4, 2006 .

^ "Leukemia and Lymphoma Society" .

501(c) . Leukemia and Lymphoma Society.

Archived from the original on March 24, 2005 . Retrieved August 4, 2006 .

^ "It's Over: The Operative Words are "Not Guilty" " .

Rush Limbaugh . RushLimbaugh.com. May 1, 2006. Archived from the original on September 12, 2012 . Retrieved November 15, 2006 .

^ Arian Campo-Flores; Evan Thomas (2006).

"Rehabbing Rush" .

Newsweek . Archived from the original on May 4, 2006.

^ a b "2000 Annual Report" (PDF) . Leukemia and Lymphoma Society. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 16, 2003.

^ "The American Dream Is No Myth and Our Cure-A-Thon Numbers Prove It" .

Rush Limbaugh Show . April 28, 2005. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007.

^ "Rush Limbaugh Donates $320,000 to Kick Off 2007 Leukemia & Lymphoma Society Cure-A-Thon" .

Rush Limbaugh . RushLimbaugh.com. Archived from the original on July 29, 2011 . Retrieved April 20, 2007 .

^ Leukemia and Lymphoma Society.

Rush Limbaugh Cure-A-Thon Raises $3.1 Million for Society Mission . May 1, 2007.

^ "Rush Donates $400,000 to Kick Off Annual Blood Cancer Cure-A-Thon" .

Rush Limbaugh . RushLimbaugh.com. Archived from the original on June 12, 2011 . Retrieved April 18, 2008 .

^ "Marine Corps-Law Enforcement Foundation Marine Corps-Law Enforcement charity article" . RushLimbaugh.com.

Archived from the original on July 28, 2012 . Retrieved November 9, 2008 .

^ "Marine Corps-Law Enforcement Foundation Home Page" . Mc-lef.org. Archived from the original on October 24, 2007 . Retrieved November 9, 2008 .

^ Thomas Ferraro (October 19, 2007).

"Reid-Limbaugh spat raises $2.1 million for children" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on May 11, 2009 . Retrieved February 2, 2017 .

^ "Support Our Patriots" .

Two If By Tea . KARHL Holdings, LLC. Archived from the original on August 14, 2011 . Retrieved December 10, 2011 .

^ Olson, Alexandra (July 3, 2019).

"Is the Betsy Ross flag racist? Nike listened to Colin Kaepernick, but hate group monitors say no, conservatives push back" .

Chicago Tribune . Archived from the original on August 15, 2019 . Retrieved September 5, 2019 .

^ "Betsy Ross Apparel Raises $5 Million!" .

Tunnel to Towers Foundation .

Archived from the original on July 28, 2020 . Retrieved December 12, 2019 .

^ Gregory, Ted (August 18, 1995). "Right and wrong; Rush Limbaugh critics want to set the facts straight, but it's not easy".

Chicago Tribune .

^ "The Way Things Ought to Be, by..." Chicago Tribune . September 26, 1993 . Retrieved April 30, 2022 .

^ Quinn, Annalisa (May 15, 2014).

"Book News: Rush Limbaugh Wins Children's Book 'Author Of The Year' Award" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on September 25, 2014 . Retrieved September 26, 2014 .

^ Howell, Kellan (March 22, 2014).

"Limbaugh's 'Rush Revere' puts host in the running for children's book award" .

The Washington Times .

Archived from the original on April 6, 2014 . Retrieved April 6, 2014 .

^ Limbaugh, Rush (October 8, 2014).

"It's the Third Rush Revere Book" .

Archived from the original on December 27, 2014 . Retrieved December 26, 2014 .

^ a b Sheri & Bob Stritof.

"The Marriages of Rush Limbaugh" .

About.com . Archived from the original on January 27, 2009 . Retrieved June 3, 2009 .

^ Chafets 2010 , p. 37.

^ Brozan, Nadine (May 30, 1994).

"Wedding Announcements" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 25, 2009 . Retrieved April 20, 2009 .

^ Herald Staff. "Rush's divorce final" The Miami Herald .

February 19, 2005. Pg. 4A ^ "Quick & Dirty" .

New York Daily News . New York. Archived from the original on December 10, 2006.

^ Peters, Jeremy W. (August 21, 2011).

"A Conservative Beachhead in the Sunshine" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 23, 2014 . Retrieved January 10, 2013 .

^ "Rush Limbaugh Marries Fourth Wife Kathryn Rogers in Florida –  Wedding Day" .

National Ledger . June 5, 2010. Archived from the original on June 8, 2010 . Retrieved June 10, 2010 .

^ Weiner, Rachel (January 5, 2010).

"Rush Limbaugh's Girlfriend Kathryn Rogers Gives Inside Story On Heart Scare" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on January 10, 2010 . Retrieved January 30, 2010 .

^ Powers, Doug (June 5, 2010).

"Rush to the Altar –  And the Wedding Singer Is..." Michelle Malkin. Archived from the original on October 14, 2011 . Retrieved December 10, 2011 .

^ Silverman, Stephen (June 7, 2010).

"Elton John Sings at Rush Limbaugh's 4th Wedding" .

People.com .

Archived from the original on June 8, 2010.

^ Roxanne Roberts; Amy Argetsinger (June 6, 2010).

"Love, etc: Rush Limbaugh marries for the fourth time" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on October 24, 2011.

^ "Tea The People" .

Two If By Tea . KARHL Holdings, LLC. Archived from the original on July 23, 2011 . Retrieved April 25, 2012 .

^ "History of Two If By Tea" .

Adventures of Rush Revere . Archived from the original on November 30, 2020 . Retrieved November 20, 2020 .

^ Candiotti, Susan (October 3, 2003).

"Limbaugh mostly mum on reports of drug probe" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on July 14, 2006 . Retrieved September 3, 2006 .

^ George Bennett & John Pacenti (October 11, 2003).

"Talk host Limbaugh to enter drug rehab" .

Palm Beach Post . p. 1A. Archived from the original on June 24, 2004.

^ a b "Limbaugh reaches settlement in drugs case" .

NBC News .

Associated Press . April 28, 2006 . Retrieved May 22, 2021 .

^ "Transcript Of Rush Limbaugh's Comments On His Painkiller Addiction" .

wave3.com . Gray Television Group, Inc. October 10, 2003 . Retrieved May 22, 2021 .

^ "Limbaugh may face a rarely used charge" .

Associated Press . January 4, 2004.

Archived from the original on October 13, 2007 . Retrieved November 14, 2006 .

^ "Prosecutors Push to Speak with Limbaugh Doctors".

The Palm Beach Post . November 9, 2005. pp. 3B.

^ "Improbable ally joins Limbaugh privacy fight".

The St. Petersburg Times . January 13, 2004. pp. 1B.

^ "Palm Beach Appeals Court to Hear Argument in Limbaugh Medical Records Case" (Press release). West Palm Beach: ACLU. April 7, 2004. Archived from the original on December 2, 2008 . Retrieved November 9, 2008 .

^ "Judge Limits Limbaugh Inquiry". The Palm Beach Daily News. December 13, 2005. p. 1.

^ a b "Rush Limbaugh Arrested On Drug Charges, Conservative Radio Commentator Turns Himself In But Claims Innocence" .

CBS News . April 28, 2006. Archived from the original on November 4, 2008 . Retrieved November 9, 2008 .

^ "Lou Dobbs Tonight" .

Transcripts .

CNN . April 28, 2006.

Archived from the original on February 2, 2007 . Retrieved November 9, 2008 .

^ "Rehab, $30,000 to keep Limbaugh out of court" .

CNN . April 29, 2006.

Archived from the original on December 19, 2008 . Retrieved November 9, 2008 .

^ "Settlement Agreement Ends State Investigation of Rush Limbaugh" . RushLimbaugh.com. April 28, 2006. Archived from the original on May 23, 2006.

^ Skoloff, Brian (May 1, 2006).

"Limbaugh Facing Drug Tests Under Deal" .

Archived from the original on July 28, 2020 . Retrieved August 28, 2013 .

^ a b c "Rush Limbaugh Detained With Viagra" .

CBS News . CBS Interactive, Inc. June 27, 2006.

Archived from the original on February 6, 2020 . Retrieved February 10, 2020 .

^ Levine, Greg.

"Customs Officials Hold Rush Limbaugh In Viagra Flap" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on March 5, 2020 . Retrieved February 11, 2020 .

^ "Rush to Excellence Speech for WPHT-AM Philadelphia" .

Transcript . RushLimbaugh.com. October 11, 2007. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007 . Retrieved November 9, 2008 .

^ "Limbaugh Losing His Hearing" .

CBS News . October 8, 2001.

Archived from the original on July 31, 2011 . Retrieved November 12, 2010 .

^ Maier, Timothy W. (January 28, 2002).

"Limbaugh learning to listen again: Rush Limbaugh lost most of his hearing because of a rare disease, but the conservative icon says he has not lost his ability to communicate with his audience" . Insight on the News. Archived from the original on January 9, 2008 . Retrieved November 9, 2008 .

^ "Did Drugs Cause Limbaugh's Hearing Loss?" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on November 26, 2013 . Retrieved August 15, 2012 .

^ "Rush to get bionic tune up" .

Transcript . 4 Hearing Loss. April 28, 2005. Archived from the original on September 30, 2005 . Retrieved November 9, 2008 .

^ " "Limbaugh Says Tests Found Nothing Wrong" .

KITV.com . January 1, 2010. Archived from the original on January 7, 2010.

^ "The Miracle of Cochlear Implant Surgery" . RushLimbaugh.com. April 8, 2014.

Archived from the original on April 9, 2014 . Retrieved April 8, 2014 .

^ "The Results of My Right-Side Cochlear Implant Activation: Magic Happened" . RushLimbaugh.com. April 9, 2014.

Archived from the original on May 12, 2014 . Retrieved May 10, 2014 .

^ a b Ross, Martha (February 4, 2020).

"Rush Limbaugh denied smoking risks in 2015: 'Smokers aren't killing anybody' " .

The Mercury News .

Archived from the original on February 17, 2021 . Retrieved February 19, 2021 .

^ Gorman, Steve (February 3, 2020).

"Radio host Rush Limbaugh announces lung cancer diagnosis on air" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on February 3, 2020 . Retrieved February 3, 2020 .

^ "Business of Health: Rush Limbaugh's illness puts spotlight on lung cancer" .

Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation | OMRF . February 16, 2020.

^ Flood, Brian (February 3, 2020).

"Rush Limbaugh announces he has 'advanced lung cancer' " .

Fox News .

Archived from the original on February 3, 2020 . Retrieved February 3, 2020 .

^ Valinsky, Jordan (October 20, 2020).

"Rush Limbaugh says his lung cancer is terminal" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on October 20, 2020 . Retrieved October 20, 2020 .

^ a b Flood, Brian (February 17, 2021).

"Rush Limbaugh, conservative talk radio pioneer, dead at 70" .

Fox News .

Archived from the original on February 17, 2021 . Retrieved May 22, 2021 .

^ WFLA 8 ON Your Side Staff (February 19, 2021).

"Flags in Florida will be lowered for Rush Limbaugh, Gov. Ron DeSantis says" .

WFLA-TV .

Archived from the original on February 19, 2021 . Retrieved February 19, 2021 .

^ "Rush Limbaugh laid to rest" .

Southeast Missourian . February 26, 2021.

Archived from the original on February 27, 2021 . Retrieved February 28, 2021 .

^ Suddath, Claire (March 4, 2009).

"Conservative Radio Host Rush Limbaugh" .

Time .

Archived from the original on December 24, 2020 . Retrieved February 6, 2020 .

Feminism was established so as to allow unattractive women access to the mainstream of society. [ The Rush Limbaugh Show , August 12, 2005] ^ Bowman, James (August 1, 2003).

"Rush: The Leader of The Opposition" .

National Review . Archived from the original on March 21, 2012 . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

^ Evans, Greg (February 21, 2021).

"A deep dive into Birch Barlow, the 'Rush Limbaugh' of The Simpsons" .

indy100.com . Archived from the original on May 22, 2021 . Retrieved May 22, 2021 .

^ Goodman, Walter (February 28, 1995).

"Television Review, What Makes Rush Limbaugh Tick So Loudly" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 20, 2019 . Retrieved April 20, 2019 .

^ Rothstein, Mervyn (Spring 1994).

"Rush's Judgment" .

Cigar Aficionado .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2018 . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

^ Parker, Penny (March 20, 1996). "Ties loud, just like Limbaugh".

Denver Post . p. C–1.

^ "NAB Announces 2014 Marconi Awards Winners" . www.allaccess.com. September 11, 2014.

Archived from the original on July 10, 2018 . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

^ Steuter, Erin; Wills, Deborah (2008).

At War With Metaphor: Media, Propaganda, and Racism in the War on Terror . Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books. p. 134.

ISBN 978-0-7391-2198-6 . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

^ Gay, Kathlyn (2012).

American Dissidents: An Encyclopedia of Activists, Subversives, and Prisoners of Conscience . ABC-CLIO. p. 387.

ISBN 978-1-59884-764-2 .

^ Kidder, David S.; Oppenheim, Noah D. (2008).

The Intellectual Devotional Modern Culture: Revive Your Mind, Complete Your Education, and Converse Confidently with the Culturati . Rodale. p. 323.

ISBN 978-1-60529-793-4 .

^ Stelter, Brian (July 3, 2008).

"A Lucrative Deal for Rush Limbaugh" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2018 . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

^ Cuccinello, Hayley C. (October 5, 2017).

"The World's Highest-Paid Radio Hosts 2017" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2018 . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

^ "The 25 Greatest Radio Talk Show Hosts of All Time" .

Talkers . September 2002.

Archived from the original on October 16, 2018 . Retrieved January 29, 2006 .

^ "Top Talk Audiences" .

Talkers .

Archived from the original on September 6, 2017 . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

^ Chmielewski, Dawn (February 17, 2021).

"Rush Limbaugh Led A Radio Revolution That Earned Him More Than $1 Billion" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on March 29, 2021 . Retrieved February 19, 2021 .

^ Levin, Mark R. (January 7, 2008).

"Man of the Year: Rush Limbaugh" .

Human Events .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2018 . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

^ Dimond, Anna (December 1, 2008).

"Barbara Walters Gets Up Close with 2008's Most Fascinating People" .

TV Guide .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2018 . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

^ "Rush's First Televised Address to the Nation: Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC) Speech" .

RushLimbaugh.com . February 28, 2009. Archived from the original on February 13, 2012 . Retrieved January 31, 2012 .

^ Chafets 2010a , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Chafets, Ze'ev (May 19, 2010b).

"The Limbaugh Victory" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2018 . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

^ Naik, Richa (May 18, 2012).

"Rush Limbaugh inducted into Hall of Famous Missourians" .

MSNBC .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2018 . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

^ "Rush Limbaugh's Bust On Display In State Capital" .

Fox2now.com . May 22, 2012.

Archived from the original on October 15, 2012 . Retrieved August 2, 2012 .

^ "Rush Bust Gets Its Own Dittocam – The Rush Limbaugh Show" .

Rushlimbaugh.com . May 25, 2012.

Archived from the original on July 30, 2012 . Retrieved August 2, 2012 .

^ Al-Arshani, Sarah (February 4, 2020).

"Trump awards controversial talk radio host Rush Limbaugh, who has advanced lung cancer, with the Presidential Medal of Freedom at SOTU" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on February 5, 2020 . Retrieved February 5, 2020 .

Sources Chafets, Ze'ev (2010).

Rush Limbaugh: An Army of One . Sentinel.

ISBN 978-1-59523-063-8 .

Chafets, Ze'ev (2010a).

Rush Limbaugh: An Army of One . New York: Penguin Books.

ISBN 978-1-101-43456-7 . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

Colford, Paul D. (1994).

The Rush Limbaugh Story: Talent on Loan from God –  An Unauthorized Biography . St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 978-0-312-95272-3 .

Further reading Kathleen Hall Jamieson and Joseph N. Cappella (2010).

Echo Chamber: Rush Limbaugh and the Conservative Media Establishment . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195398601 .

External links Wikiquote has quotations related to Rush Limbaugh .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Rush Limbaugh .

The Rush Limbaugh Show official site Appearances on C-SPAN Rush Limbaugh at IMDb The official site for Two if by Tea advertising the Adventures of Rush Revere v t e Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Libertarian Moderate Movement Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Progressive Social Traditionalist Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian nationalism Classical liberalism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Gender essentialism Complementarianism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Militarism Moral absolutism Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Protectionism Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Tradition People Presidents Adams (John) Adams (John Quincy) G. H. W. Bush G. W. Bush Cleveland Coolidge Harding Hoover McKinley Nixon Reagan W. H. Taft Trump Washington Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan II Kavanaugh Kennedy O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft Thomas Vermeule Yoo Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Buckley Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eastman Eliot Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hazony Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kendall Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lasch Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet O'Connor Ong Ransom Rieff Santayana Sowell Strauss Viereck Voegelin Washington Weaver Yarvin Other figures Ailes Atwater Beck Breitbart Carlson Cheney Coulter Cruz DeSantis Dilling Elder Falwell Gingrich Giuliani Goldwater Hannity Ingraham Levin Limbaugh Lindbergh Lodge Lovecraft McCain McCarthy McConnell Novak O'Reilly Palin Rand Paul Ron Paul Pence Perot Quayle Romney Rove Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Schlafly Shapiro Stone Robert A. Taft Booker T. Washington Parties American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party of New York State Constitution Party Republican Party Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Movements Alt-right Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Dark Enlightenment Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBT Libertarian Republicans Militia movement Patriot movement Christian Radical Right Reactionary feminism Tea Party movement Trumpism Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Historical factions Bourbon Democrats Dixiecrats Loyalists Old Right Redeemers Southern Agrarians Other organizations 1789 Capital ATR FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Rockbridge Network Tea Party Patriots USCC Literature Democracy in America (1835–1840) Democracy and Leadership (1924) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) Losing Ground (1984) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Bell Curve (1994) A Republic, Not an Empire (1999) Hillbilly Elegy (2017) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) See also American nationalism Bibliography of conservatism in the United States List of American conservatives National conservatism Southern strategy Conservatism portal Portals : Biography Conservatism Florida Radio United States Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Poland Israel Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐int.eqiad.main‐6bcc747f5‐267jj
Cached time: 20250817043634
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.453 seconds
Real time usage: 3.789 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 23584/1000000
Revision size: 203037/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 782462/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 41046/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 25/100
Expensive parser function count: 27/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1155734/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.258/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15891605/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3246.271      1 -total
 55.71% 1808.526      1 Template:Reflist
 28.09%  911.786    176 Template:Cite_web
 15.13%  491.169     89 Template:Cite_news
  9.67%  313.976      1 Template:Infobox_person
  6.44%  209.075     25 Template:Sfn
  5.51%  178.959     20 Template:Pluralize_from_text
  4.28%  139.083     19 Template:Cite_book
  3.84%  124.578      2 Template:Plainlist
  3.68%  119.441      1 Template:Conservatism_US_footer Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:25427:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043634 and revision id 1303311239. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rush_Limbaugh&oldid=1303311239 " Categories : 1951 births 2021 deaths 20th-century American non-fiction writers 21st-century American non-fiction writers American children's writers American conservative talk radio hosts American conspiracy theorists American infotainers American male non-fiction writers American people of German descent American political commentators American political writers American radio show creators American television talk show hosts Burials at Bellefontaine Cemetery Central High School (Cape Girardeau, Missouri) alumni Critics of multiculturalism Deaf activists American activists with disabilities American deaf people Deaf political professionals Deaths from lung cancer in Florida Male critics of feminism People from Cape Girardeau, Missouri People from Palm Beach, Florida Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients Radio personalities from California Radio personalities from Florida Radio personalities from New York City The Rush Limbaugh Show Shock jocks Southeast Missouri State University alumni Writers from Missouri 20th-century American male writers 21st-century American male writers Limbaugh family Deaf writers Conservatism in the United States Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2021 CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from October 2021 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2021 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use mdy dates from April 2021 Articles with hCards All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2024 Articles containing potentially dated statements from January 2019 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from March 2021 Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2019 Commons category link from Wikidata People appearing on C-SPAN Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 06:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rush Limbaugh 39 languages Add topic

