Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Lower pair 3 Higher pairs 4 Wrapping pair/ Higher pair 5 Joint notation Toggle Joint notation subsection 5.1 Context 5.2 Abbreviations 5.3 Notation 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Kinematic pair 24 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano Қазақша 日本語 Piemontèis Polski Română Русский Српски / srpski தமிழ் Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Connection between two physical objects which constrains their relative movement This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Kinematic pair" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Classical mechanics F = d p d t {\displaystyle {\textbf {F}}={\frac {d\mathbf {p} }{dt}}} Second law of motion History Timeline Textbooks Branches Applied Celestial Continuum Dynamics Field theory Kinematics Kinetics Statics Statistical mechanics Fundamentals Acceleration Angular momentum Couple D'Alembert's principle Energy kinetic potential Force Frame of reference Inertial frame of reference Impulse Inertia / Moment of inertia Mass Mechanical power Mechanical work Moment Momentum Space Speed Time Torque Velocity Virtual work Formulations Newton's laws of motion Analytical mechanics Lagrangian mechanics Hamiltonian mechanics Routhian mechanics Hamilton–Jacobi equation Appell's equation of motion Koopman–von Neumann mechanics Core topics Damping Displacement Equations of motion Euler's laws of motion Fictitious force Friction Harmonic oscillator Inertial / Non-inertial reference frame Motion ( linear ) Newton's law of universal gravitation Newton's laws of motion Relative velocity Rigid body dynamics Euler's equations Simple harmonic motion Vibration Rotation Circular motion Rotating reference frame Centripetal force Centrifugal force reactive Coriolis force Pendulum Tangential speed Rotational frequency Angular acceleration / displacement / frequency / velocity Scientists Kepler Galileo Huygens Newton Horrocks Halley Maupertuis Daniel Bernoulli Johann Bernoulli Euler d'Alembert Clairaut Lagrange Laplace Poisson Hamilton Jacobi Cauchy Routh Liouville Appell Gibbs Koopman von Neumann Physics portal Category v t e In classical mechanics , a kinematic pair is a connection between two physical objects that imposes constraints on their relative movement ( kinematics ). German engineer Franz Reuleaux introduced the kinematic pair as a new approach to the study of machines [ 1 ] that provided an advance over the notion of elements consisting of simple machines .

[ 2 ] Description [ edit ] Kinematics is the branch of classical mechanics which describes the motion of points , bodies (objects) and systems of bodies (groups of objects) without consideration of the causes of motion.

[ 3 ] Kinematics as a field of study is often referred to as the "geometry of motion".

[ 4 ] For further detail, see Kinematics .

Hartenberg & Denavit [ 5 ] presents the definition of a kinematic pair: In the matter of connections between rigid bodies, Reuleaux recognized two kinds; he called them higher and lower pairs (of elements). With higher pairs, the two elements are in contact at a point or along a line, as in a ball bearing or disk cam and follower; the relative motions of coincident points are dissimilar. Lower pairs are those for which area contact may be visualized, as in pin connections, crossheads , ball-and socket joints and some others; the relative motion of coincident points of the elements, and hence of their links, are similar, and an exchange of elements from one link to the other does not alter the relative motion of the parts as it would with higher pairs.

In kinematics, the two connected physical objects, forming a kinematic pair, are called 'rigid bodies'. In studies of mechanisms , manipulators or robots , the two objects are typically called 'links'.

Lower pair [ edit ] A lower pair is an ideal joint that constrains contact between a surface in the moving body to a corresponding in the fixed body. A lower pair is one in which there occurs a surface or area contact between two members, e.g. nut and screw, universal joint used to connect two propeller shafts.

Cases of lower joints: A revolute R joint , or hinged joint, requires a line in the moving body to remain co-linear with a line in the fixed body, and a plane perpendicular to this line in the moving body maintain contact with a similar perpendicular plane in the fixed body. This imposes five constraints on the relative movement of the links, which therefore has one degree of freedom .

A prismatic P joint , or slider, requires that a line in the moving body remain co-linear with a line in the fixed body, and a plane parallel to this line in the moving body maintain contact with a similar parallel plane in the fixed body. This imposes five constraints on the relative movement of the links, which therefore has one degree of freedom.

A screw joint or helical H joint requires cut threads in two links, so that there is a turning as well as sliding motion between them. This joint has one degree of freedom.

A cylindrical C joint requires that a line in the moving body remain co-linear with a line in the fixed body. It is a combination of a revolute joint and a sliding joint. This joint has two degrees of freedom.

A universal U joint consists of two intersecting, mutually orthogonal revolute joints connecting rigid links whose axes are inclined to each other.

A spherical S joint or ball and socket joint requires that a point in the moving body remain stationary in the fixed body. This joint has three degrees of freedom, corresponding to rotations around orthogonal axes.

A planar joint requires that a plane in the moving body maintain contact with a plane in fixed body. This joint has three degrees of freedom. The moving plane can slide in two dimensions along the fixed plane, and it can rotate on an axis normal to the fixed plane.

A parallelogram Pa joint, is composed of four links connected together by four revolute joints at the corners of a parallelogram.

Higher pairs [ edit ] Generally, a higher pair is a constraint that requires a curve or surface in the moving body to maintain contact with a curve or surface in the fixed body. For example, the contact between a cam and its follower is a higher pair called a cam joint . Similarly, the contact between the involute curves that form the meshing teeth of two gears are cam joints, as is a wheel rolling on a surface. It has a point or line contact.

Wrapping pair/ Higher pair [ edit ] A wrapping/higher pair is a constraint that comprises belts , chains , and such other devices. A belt-driven pulley is an example of this pair.
In this type of which is very similar to the higher pair (which is having point or line contact), but having multiple point contact.

Joint notation [ edit ] Context [ edit ] Mechanisms, manipulators or robots are typically composed of links connected together by joints.

Serial manipulators , like the SCARA robot , connect a moving platform to a base through a single chain of links and joints. In robotics the moving platform is called the 'end effector'. Multiple serial chains connect the moving platform to the base of parallel manipulators , like the Gough-Stewart mechanism. The individual serial chains of parallel manipulators are called 'limbs' or 'legs'. Topology refers to the arrangement of links and joints forming a manipulator or robot. Joint notation is a convenient way of defining the joint topology of mechanisms, manipulators or robots.

Abbreviations [ edit ] Joints are abbreviated as follows: prismatic P, revolute R , universal U , cylindrical C , spherical S , parallelogram Pa . Actuated or active joints are identified by underscores, i.e., P , R , U , C , S , Pa .

Notation [ edit ] Joint notation specifies the type and order of the joints forming a mechanism.

[ 6 ] It identifies the sequences of joints, starting from the abbreviation of the first joint at the base to the last abbreviation at the moving platform. For example, joint notation for the serial SCARA robot is RRP , indicating that it is composed of two active revolute joints RR followed by an active prismatic P joint. Repeated joints may be summarized by their number; so that joint notation for the SCARA robot can also be written 2 RP for example. Joint notation for the parallel Gough-Stewart mechanism is 6-U P S or 6(U P S) indicating that it is composed of six identical serial limbs, each one composed of a universal U , active prismatic P and spherical S joint. Parentheses () enclose the joints of individual serial limbs.

See also [ edit ] Mechanism (engineering) Manipulator (device) Linkage (mechanical) References [ edit ] ^ Reuleaux, F., 1876 The Kinematics of Machinery, (trans. and annotated by A. B. W. Kennedy), reprinted by Dover, New York (1963) ^ A. P. Usher, 1929, A History of Mechanical Inventions, Harvard University Press, (reprinted by Dover Publications 1968).

^ Thomas Wallace Wright (1896).

Elements of Mechanics Including Kinematics, Kinetics and Statics . E and FN Spon. Chapter 1.

^ Russell C. Hibbeler (2009).

"Kinematics and kinetics of a particle" .

Engineering Mechanics: Dynamics (12th ed.). Prentice Hall. p. 298.

ISBN 978-0-13-607791-6 .

^ R. S. Hartenberg and J. Denavit (1964) Kinematic synthesis of linkages , pp 17-18, New York: McGraw-Hill.

^ Craig, John (2005).

Introduction to Robotics . Pearson/Prentice Hall. p. 71.

ISBN 0-13-123629-6 .

Hartenberg, R.S. & J. Denavit (1964) Kinematic synthesis of linkages , pp 17,18, New York: McGraw-Hill, online link from Cornell University .

v t e Kinematic pair Lower pairs Revolute Prismatic Cylindrical Screw Planar Spherical (ball) Higher pairs Cam Gears Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kinematic_pair&oldid=1273154005 " Categories : Kinematics Rigid bodies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2023 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 1 February 2025, at 01:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kinematic pair 24 languages Add topic

