Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Death and legends of final days 3 Writings Toggle Writings subsection 3.1 Epistle of Clement 3.1.1 Theology 3.2 Writings formerly attributed to Clement 3.2.1 Second Epistle of Clement 3.2.2 Epistles on Virginity 3.2.3 False Decretals 3.3 Clementine literature 4 Recognition as a saint Toggle Recognition as a saint subsection 4.1 Relics 4.2 Symbolism 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Notes 6.2 Citations 6.3 Sources 6.4 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Clement of Rome 94 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Furlan Gaeilge Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bishop of Rome from 88 to 99 Pope Saint Clement I Bishop of Rome c.

1000 portrayal at Saint Sophia's Cathedral, Kyiv Papacy began c.

92 Papacy ended c.

100 Predecessor Anacletus Successor Evaristus Orders Consecration by Saint Peter Personal details Born Rome , Italy , Roman Empire Died c.

100 Chersonesus , Taurica , Bosporan Kingdom , Crimea , Roman Empire Sainthood Feast day 23 November (Catholic Church, Lutheran Church) 24 November (most Byzantine Churches) 25 November (Russian Orthodox Church) 29 Hathor ( Oriental Orthodox Churches ) Venerated in Catholic Church Anglican Communion Lutheran Church Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Church of the East Attributes Papal vestments Mariner's cross Anchor tied to the side Palm of martyrdom Patronage Angono, Rizal Mariners Stone-cutters [ 1 ] Shrines Basilica di San Clemente , Rome Church of St Clement, Nantes St Clement's Church , Moscow Diocesan Shrine and Parish of St. Clement , Angono, Rizal , Philippines Other popes  named Clement Clement of Rome ( Latin : Clemens Romanus ; Ancient Greek : Κλήμης Ῥώμης , romanized : Klēmēs Rōmēs ; died c.

100 ), also known as Pope Clement I , was the Bishop of Rome in the late first century . He is considered to be the first of the Apostolic Fathers of the Church.

[ 2 ] Little is known about Clement's life.

Tertullian claimed that Clement was ordained by Saint Peter .

[ 3 ] Early church lists place him as the second or third [ 4 ] [ a ] bishop of Rome.

Eusebius , in his book Church History mentioned Clement as the third bishop of Rome and as the "co-laborer" of Paul .

[ 5 ] In Against Heresies , Irenaeus described Clement as the successor to Anacletus , who was the third bishop of Rome, and as a personal acquaintance of the Apostles .

[ 6 ] According to the Annuario Pontificio , Clement was the fourth bishop of Rome, holding office at the very end of the 1st century.

[ b ] It is likely that Clement died in exile, and was possibly martyred . According to apocryphal stories dating back to the 4th century by authors such as Rufinus , Clement was imprisoned by Roman Emperor Trajan , and was executed by being tied to an anchor and thrown into the sea.

[ 2 ] [ 18 ] The Liber Pontificalis states that Clement died in Greece in the third year of Trajan's reign, or 100.

The only known genuine extant writing of Clement is his letter to the church at Corinth ( 1 Clement ) in response to a dispute in which certain presbyters of the Corinthian church had been deposed.

[ 4 ] He asserted the authority of the presbyters as rulers of the church because they had been appointed by the Apostles.

[ 4 ] His letter, which is one of the oldest extant Christian documents outside the New Testament , was read in the church at Corinth, along with other epistles, some of which later became part of the Christian canon . This letter is considered to be the earliest affirmation of the principle of apostolic succession . A second epistle, 2 Clement , was once controversially attributed to Clement, although recent scholarship suggests it to be a homily by another author.

[ 4 ] In the pseudo-Clementine Writings , Clement is the intermediary through whom the apostles teach the church.

[ 4 ] Clement is recognized as a saint in many Christian churches and a patron saint of mariners. He is commemorated on 23 November in the Catholic Church , the Anglican Communion , and the Lutheran Church . In Eastern Orthodox Christianity his feast is kept on 25 November.

[ 19 ] Life [ edit ] 11th-century fresco in the Basilica of San Clemente, Rome: Saints Cyril and Methodius bring Saint Clement's relics to Rome The Liber Pontificalis [ 20 ] presents a list that makes Linus the second in the line of bishops of Rome, with Peter as first; but at the same time it states that Peter ordained two bishops, Linus and Anacletus , for the priestly service of the community, devoting himself instead to prayer and preaching, and that it was to Clement that he entrusted the Church as a whole, appointing him as his successor. Tertullian considered Clement to be the immediate successor of Peter.

[ 21 ] In one of his works, Jerome listed Clement as "the fourth bishop of Rome after Peter, if indeed the second was Linus and the third Anacletus, although most of the Latins think that Clement was second after the apostle." [ 22 ] Clement is put after Linus and Cletus/Anacletus in the earliest (c. 180) account, that of Irenaeus , [ 23 ] who is followed by Eusebius of Caesarea .

[ 24 ] Early succession lists name Clement as the first, [ 25 ] : 636 [ c ] second, or third [ 4 ] [ d ] successor of Peter . However, the meaning of his inclusion in these lists has been very controversial.

[ 26 ] Some believe there were presbyter-bishops as early as the 1st century, [ 26 ] but that there is no evidence for a monarchical episcopacy in Rome at such an early date.

[ 4 ] There is also, however, no evidence of a change occurring in ecclesiastical organization in the latter half of the 2nd century, which would indicate that a new or newly-monarchical episcopacy was establishing itself.

[ 26 ] A tradition that began in the 3rd and 4th century, [ 4 ] has identified him as the Clement that Paul mentioned in Philippians 4:3 , a fellow laborer in Christ.

[ e ] While in the mid-19th century it was customary to identify him as a freedman of Titus Flavius Clemens , who was consul with his cousin, the Emperor Domitian , this identification, which no ancient sources suggest, afterwards lost support.

[ 2 ] The 2nd-century Shepherd of Hermas mentions a Clement whose office it was to communicate with other churches; most likely, this is a reference to Clement I.

[ 27 ] A large congregation existed in Rome c. 58, when Paul wrote his Epistle to the Romans.

[ 4 ] Paul arrived in Rome c. 60 (Acts).

[ 4 ] Paul and Peter were said to have been martyred there.

Nero persecuted Roman Christians after Rome burned in 64, and the congregation may have suffered further persecution under Domitian (81–96). Clement was the first of early Rome's most notable bishops.

[ 28 ] The Liber Pontificalis , which documents the reigns of popes, states that Clement had known Peter.

Clement is known for his epistle to the church in Corinth (c. 96), in which he asserts the apostolic authority of the bishops/presbyters as rulers of the church.

[ 4 ] The epistle mentions episkopoi (overseers, bishops) or presbyteroi (elders, presbyters) as the upper class of minister, served by the deacons, but, since it does not mention himself, it gives no indication of the title or titles used for Clement in Rome.

Martyrdom of St Clement by Fungai Death and legends of final days [ edit ] According to apocryphal acta dating to the 4th century at earliest, Clement was banished from Rome to the Chersonesus during the reign of the Emperor Trajan [ 4 ] [ 2 ] and was set to work in a stone quarry. Finding on his arrival that the prisoners were suffering from lack of water, he knelt down in prayer. Looking up, he saw a lamb on a hill, went to where the lamb had stood and struck the ground with his pickaxe, releasing a gushing stream of clear water. This miracle resulted in the conversion of large numbers of the local pagans and his fellow prisoners to Christianity. As punishment, Clement was martyred by being tied to an anchor [ 29 ] and thrown from a boat into the Black Sea . The legend recounts that every year a miraculous ebbing of the sea revealed a divinely built shrine containing his bones. However, the oldest sources on Clement's life, Eusebius and Jerome , note nothing of his martyrdom.

[ 25 ] : 639 The Inkerman Cave Monastery marks the supposed place of Clement's burial in Crimea . A year or two before his own death in 869, Cyril brought to Rome what he believed to be the relics of Clement, bones he found in Crimea buried with an anchor on dry land. They are now enshrined in the Basilica di San Clemente .

[ 2 ] But there are also other traditions [ 30 ] about an ancient veneration of the relics in Chersonesus and the translation of the head to Kyiv . Other relics of Clement, including his head, are claimed by the Kyiv Monastery of the Caves in Ukraine.

Writings [ edit ] The Liber Pontificalis states that Clement wrote two letters (though the second letter, 2 Clement, is no longer ascribed to him by many modern scholars).

[ 4 ] [ 2 ] [ 31 ] Epistle of Clement [ edit ] Main article: First Epistle of Clement Clement's only extant, uncontested text is a letter to the Christian congregation in Corinth , often called the First Epistle of Clement or 1 Clement. The history of 1 Clement clearly and continuously shows Clement as the author of this letter.

[ 32 ] It is considered the earliest authentic Christian document outside the New Testament .

Clement writes to the troubled congregation in Corinth, where certain "presbyters" or "bishops" have been deposed (the class of clergy above that of deacons is argued by certain historians to be designated indifferently by the two terms).

[ 4 ] Clement calls for repentance and reinstatement of those who have been deposed, in line with maintenance of order and obedience to church authority, since the apostles established the ministry of "bishops and deacons." [ 4 ] He mentions "offering the gifts" as one of the functions of the higher class of clergy.

[ 4 ] The epistle offers valuable insight into Church ministry at that time and into the history of the Roman Church.

[ 4 ] It was highly regarded, and was read in church at Corinth along with the Scriptures c. 170.

[ 4 ] We should be obedient unto God, rather than follow those who in arrogance and unruliness have set themselves up as leaders in abominable jealousy.... For Christ is with them that are lowly of mind, not with them that exalt themselves over the flock.

— Clement of Rome 1885b , 1 Clem 14:1; 16:1 Do we then think it to be a great and marvelous thing, if the Creator of the universe shall bring about the resurrection of them that have served Him with holiness in the assurance of a good faith, seeing that He showeth to us even by a bird the magnificence of His promise?

— Clement of Rome 1885b , 1 Clem 26:1 In the epistle, it is argued by some that Clement uses the terms "bishop" and "presbyter" interchangeably for the higher order of ministers above deacons.

[ 4 ] In some congregations, particularly in Egypt, the distinction between bishops and presbyters seems to have become established only later.

[ 33 ] But by the middle of the second century all the leading Christian centres had bishops.

[ 33 ] Scholars such as Bart Ehrman treat as significant the fact that, of the seven letters written by Ignatius of Antioch to seven Christian churches shortly after the time of Clement, the only one that does not present the church as headed by a single bishop is that addressed to the church in Rome, although this letter did not refer to a collective priesthood either.

[ 34 ] Clement's letter also contains historical references, it mentions persecutions of Christians, records the martyrdom of the Apostle Peter and suggests that the apostle Paul traveled to Spain .

[ 2 ] Theology [ edit ] Clement of Rome Clement's view on justification has had much scholarly discussion, as he is sometimes argued to have believed sola fide , though others believe him as having synergist views. Debate exists, because Clement directly stated that "we are not justified by ourselves but by faith", however in other places of the letter, he stresses judgement on sin.

[ 35 ] The Protestant scholar Tom Schreiner argued that Clement of Rome believed in a grace oriented justification by faith, which will cause the believer to do works as a result, [ 36 ] Philip Schaff also said that Clement probably taught a faith alone doctrine [ 37 ] while Catholic Encyclopedia wrote that Clement believed works to be part of justification.

[ 2 ] Rudolf Knopf and Rudolf Bultmann also believed that Clement believed in synergism , and that the believer needs to cooperate with the grace of God to be saved. Rudolf Knopf in his commentary on the letter of Clement to the Corinthians stated that: "Pre-Christian sins are wiped out by baptism. For those sins that follow, a person must have faith in divine mercy and, at the same time, that person must exhibit his or her own good deeds, apart from which the person cannot be saved" [ 35 ] David Downs argued against the view that Clement of Rome holds synergist views, he argued that Clement did not write a letter about deep soteriology, but instead to provide moral guidance to the Corinthians, David Downs stated "According to the soteriological economy of Clement everything rests on the goodness, mercy, and election of the Creator, which have befitted the 'chosen portion' through Jesus".

[ 35 ] Thomas Schreiner argued that Clement taught that faith was enough to be saved because of 1 Clement 32:4 where he stated: [ 38 ] And so we, having been called through His will in Christ Jesus, are not justified through ourselves or through our own wisdom or understanding or piety or works which we wrought in holiness of heart, but through faith, whereby the Almighty God justified all men that have been from the beginning; to whom be the glory for ever and ever. Amen. (1 Clement 32:4) [ 38 ] The epistle has been cited as the first work to establish Roman primacy , because he wrote to settle a problem in the church, [ 39 ] but most scholars see the epistle as more fraternal than authoritative, [ f ] and Orthodox scholar John Meyendorff sees it as connected with the Roman church's awareness of its "priority" (rather than "primacy") among local churches.

[ 40 ] It has also been argued by Dave Armstrong, that Clement supported Papal Infallibility in Letter to the Corinthians 1, 63. Because of him speaking of the Corinthians to "being obedient" to the things he has "written through the Holy Spirit" in order to correct and "root out the wicked passion of jealousy".

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Mosaic of Saint Clement of Rome from the Basilica of Sant'Apollinare Nuovo in Ravenna It has also been argued that the epistle may contain early evidence for belief in universal salvation .

[ 43 ] According to Catholic Encyclopedia , the letter of Clement has Trinitarian theology and Christ is frequently called as the high priest by him.

[ 2 ] Writings formerly attributed to Clement [ edit ] Saint Clement , by Tiepolo Second Epistle of Clement [ edit ] Main article: Second Epistle of Clement The Second Epistle of Clement is a homily, or sermon, likely written in Corinth or Rome, although it is doubtful it was written by Clement.

[ 4 ] Early Christian congregations often shared homilies to be read. The homily describes Christian character and repentance.

[ 4 ] It is possible that the Church from which Clement sent his epistle had included a festal homily to share in one economical post, thus the homily became known as the Second Epistle of Clement.

While 2 Clement has been traditionally ascribed to Clement, most scholars believe that 2 Clement was written in the 2nd century based on the doctrinal themes of the text and a near match between words in 2 Clement and in the Greek Gospel of the Egyptians .

[ 2 ] [ 31 ] Doubts about the authorship were already expressed in antiquity by Eusebius and Jerome .

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Epistles on Virginity [ edit ] Two "Epistles on Virginity" were traditionally attributed to Clement, but now there exists almost universal consensus that Clement was not the author of those two epistles.

[ 46 ] False Decretals [ edit ] Main article: Pseudo-Isidore A 9th-century collection of church legislation known as the False Decretals, which was once attributed to Isidore of Seville , is largely composed of forgeries. All of what it presents as letters of pre- Nicene popes, beginning with Clement, are forgeries, as are some of the documents that it attributes to councils; [ g ] and more than forty falsifications are found in the decretals that it gives as those of post-Nicene popes from Sylvester I (314–335) to Gregory II (715–731). The False Decretals were part of a series of falsifications of past legislation by a party in the Carolingian Empire whose principal aim was to free the church and the bishops from interference by the state and the metropolitan archbishops respectively.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] Clement is included among other early Christian popes as authors of the Pseudo-Isidoran (or False) Decretals, a 9th-century forgery. These decrees and letters portray even the early popes as claiming absolute and universal authority.

[ h ] Clement is the earliest pope to whom a Pseudo-Isidoran text is attributed.

Clementine literature [ edit ] Main article: Clementine literature Clement is also the hero of an early Christian romance or novel that has survived in at least two different versions, known as the Clementine literature, where he is identified with Emperor Domitian 's cousin Titus Flavius Clemens . Clementine literature portrays Clement as the Apostles' means of disseminating their teachings to the Church.

[ 4 ] Recognition as a saint [ edit ] St. Clement is one of the few Roman popes to have a Russian Orthodox church dedicated in his name.

Clement's name is in the Roman Canon of the Mass . He is commemorated on 23 November as a pope and martyr in the Catholic Church as well as within the Anglican Communion and the Lutheran Church . The Syriac Orthodox Church , the Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church , the Macedonian Orthodox Church and the Greek Orthodox Church , as well as the Syriac Catholic Church , the Syro-Malankara Catholic Church and all Byzantine Rite Eastern Catholic Churches commemorate Clement of Rome (called in Syriac "Mor Clemis" ) on 24 November; the Russian Orthodox Church commemorates Clement on 25 November. Clement is honored in the Church of England and in the Episcopal Church on 23 November.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] The St Clement's Church in Moscow is renowned for its glittering Baroque interior and iconostasis, as well as a set of gilded 18th-century railings. The parish was disbanded in 1934 and the original free-standing gate was demolished. The Lenin State Library stored its books in the building throughout the Soviet period. It was not until 2008 that the building reverted to the Russian Orthodox Church.

Clement of Rome is commemorated in the Synaxarium of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria on the 29th of the month of Hatour [25 November (Julian) – equivalent to 8 December (Gregorian) due to the current 13-day Julian–Gregorian Calendar offset]. According to the Coptic Church Synaxarium, he suffered martyrdom in 100 during the reign of Emperor Trajan (98–117). He was martyred by tying his neck to an anchor and casting him into the sea. The record of the 29th of the Coptic month of Hatour states that this saint was born in Rome to an honorable father whose name was Fostinus and also states that he was a member of the Roman senate and that his father educated him and taught him Greek literature.

Relics [ edit ] Besides relics venerated in Rome and Kyiv (see above ), 
in the city of Santa Cruz de Tenerife in Spain , the shinbone of Clement is kept. It was a gift of Sidotti, Patriarch of Antioch , to the Church of the Immaculate Conception . Historically, this was a highly revered relic in the city.

[ 52 ] Symbolism [ edit ] Anchored Cross , also known as Mariner's or Saint Clement's cross.

In workings of art, Clement can be recognized by having an anchor at his side or tied to his neck. He is most often depicted wearing papal vestments , including the pallium, and sometimes with a papal tiara but more often with a mitre . He is also sometimes shown with papal symbols such as the papal cross and the Keys of Heaven . In reference to his martyrdom, he often holds the palm of martyrdom.

Clement can be seen depicted near a fountain or spring , relating to the incident from his hagiography , or lying in a temple in the sea. The Anchored Cross or Mariner's Cross is also referred to as St. Clement's Cross, in reference to the way he was martyred.

[ 29 ] See also [ edit ] List of popes List of Catholic saints Pope Saint Clement I, patron saint archive St Clement's Day Saint Clement and Sisinnius inscription – 11th-century Romance and Latin inscription References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Campbell 1907 details the debate regarding whether there was one pope with two names, or two distinct popes. Ancient sources are contradictory, and modern scholarship is divided.

^ The 2008 Annuario pontificio gives the dates as either 92–99 or 68–76.

[ 7 ] However, the 2012 edition settles for 92 as the beginning date, [ 8 ] following Eusebius and Jerome.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] The date of 68–76 is given by the later Catalogus Liberianus and Liber Pontificalis , which are not trustworthy for the chronology of the first popes. All four sources give Peter an episcopate of 25 years in Rome, and the Liber Pontificalis even records that Peter died 38 years after Jesus' death, that is, 67–68.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] However, the Catalogus and Liber counted Peter's episcopate from 30 and thus arrived to 55, as Pope Linus is said to have succeeded in 56. The author thus "gives two incompatible traditions." [ 15 ] The year of Clement's death is disputed, it was 99 according to Jerome [ 16 ] and 100 according to Eusebius [ 17 ] (and the Liber Pontificalis , despite previously stating that his tenure ended in 76).

[ 14 ] All four sources give him a tenure of 9 years, which would place his death in 100/101.

^ Like Schaff, the Holy See 's Annuario Pontificio , gives Clement as "supreme pontiff of Rome" in either 92–99 or 68–76, making him either the first or the third successor of Saint Peter, but not the second.( Libreria Editrice Vaticana 2008 , p. 7) ^ The Catholic Encyclopedia article says that only on the false assumption that "Cletus" and "Anacletus" were two distinct persons, instead of variations of the name of single individual, did some think that Clement was the fourth successor of Saint Peter.

^ Kelly & Walsh 2005 , p. 7 note that "Writers of the 3rd and 4th centuries, like Origen , Eusebius , and Jerome , equate him (St. Clement I), perhaps, correctly, with the Clement whom St. Paul mentions ( Phil 4:3 ) as a fellow worker." ^ Phan 2000 , p. 32 writes, "Most scholars would now regard 1 Clement as an impressive example of fraternal correction rather than an authoritative intervention." ^ The Encyclopædia Britannica places the Donation of Constantine in this section; the Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church places it in the section of the pre-Nicene Popes.

^ Durant 2011 , p. 525 writes, "These early documents were designed to show that by the oldest traditions and practice of the Church no bishop might be deposed, no Church councils might be convened, and no major issue might be decided, without the consent of the pope. Even the early pontiffs, by these evidences, had claimed absolute and universal authority as vicars of Christ on Earth." Citations [ edit ] ^ "Patron Saints and their feast days" .

Pamphlets . AU. Archived from the original on 22 June 2015 . Retrieved 15 June 2015 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Chapman, Henry Palmer (1908).

"Pope St. Clement I" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 4.

^ Tertullian (1722) [ca 199]. "32".

De Praescriptione Haereticorum [ Tertullian's Prescription Against Heretics ]. Translated by Betty, Joseph. Oxford: The Theatre .

The Church of Smyrna produceth her Polycarp placed there by St. John; The Church of Rome has her Clemens placed there by St. Peter… ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v Cross, Frank Leslie ; Livingstone, Elizabeth A. (2005).

"Clement of Rome, St" .

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . Oxford University Press. p. 363.

ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3 .

^ Roberts, Alexander ; Donaldson, James (1885). "Church History of Eusebius, Book III, Chapter IV, 10".

Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers . II. Vol. I (1st ed.). Wikisource.

^ Irenaeus. "Book III, Chapter 3".

Ante-Nicene Fathers . Vol. I. Wikisource.

^ Libreria Editrice Vaticana 2008 , p. 7.

^ "Pope St Anacletus, Martyr" .

The Brighton Oratory, July 13, 2012 . 13 July 2012.

^ Eusebius , Ecclesiastical History , VIII, 15 . "In the twelfth year of ( Domitian ) Clement succeeded Anencletus after the latter had been bishop of the church of Rome for twelve years." ^ Jerome , Chronicon , AD 92 , 12th of Domitian : "Clement presided as the 3rd bishop of the Church of Rome for nine years." ^ Jerome.

"De Viris Illustribus" [On Illustrious Men].

Fathers . New advent . Retrieved 5 June 2015 .

^ Jerome , Chronicon , AD 42, AD 68 ." ^ Liberian Catalogue ^ a b Liber Pontificalis , The Latin library.

^ Loomis, Louise Ropes (2006) [1917].

The Book of the Popes (Liber Pontificalis) . Arx Publishing. p. 4ff, note 3.

ISBN 978-1-889758-86-2 – via Google books.

^ Chronicon AD 99 , 2nd year of Trajan. "Evaristus received the 4th episcopate of the Roman church." ^ Ecclesiastical History , CCEL VIII, 34 . "In the third year of the reign of the emperor mentioned above, Clement committed the episcopal government of the church of Rome to Evarestus, and departed this life after he had superintended the teaching of the divine word nine years in all…" In Bk. IV. chap. 1, Eusebius gives eight years as the duration of Evarestus’ episcopate. The truth is, as the monarchical episcopate was not yet existing in Rome, it is useless to attempt to fix his dates, or those of any of the other so-called bishops who lived before the second quarter of the second century.

^ Tyrannius Rufinus (2024) [406].

"The Martyrdom of Clement - an English Translation" .

Early Church Texts . Retrieved 30 May 2024 .

^ "Hieromartyr Clement, Pope of Rome" . The Orthodox Church in America. 2024 . Retrieved 30 May 2024 .

^ Loomis, Louise Ropes (1916).

The Book of the Popes (Liber Pontificalis) . New York: Columbia University Press. p. 7.

ISBN 978-1-889758-86-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Tertullian (1903).

"Prescription against Heretics" . In Alexander Roberts; James Donaldson (eds.).

The Ante-Nicene Fathers: Translations of the Writings of the Fathers Down to A.D. 325 . Vol. III, Part II, Section I, Ch XXXII. C. Scribner's Sons. p. 258.

^ Jerome (1885). Alexander Roberts; James Donaldson (eds.).

"Lives of Illustrious Men, Ch XV Clemens the bishop" .

Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers: Series II . Vol. III – via Wikisource .

^ Irenaeus (1885). Alexander Roberts; James Donaldson (eds.).

"Against Heresies, Book III, Ch. III" .

Ante-Nicene Fathers . Vol. I – via Wikisource .

^ Eusebius of Caesarea (1885). Alexander Roberts; James Donaldson (eds.).

"Church History of Eusebius, Book III, Chapter 4, paragraph 10" .

Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers: Series II . Vol. I – via Wikisource .

^ a b Schaff, Philip (1883).

"Ch XIII, §162 Clement of Rome." .

History of the Christian Church . Vol. II: Ante-Nicene Christianity. A.D. 100-325. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.

^ a b c Van Hove, Alphonse (1907).

"Bishop" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 2. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ "Vision II", 4. 3 ^ Cross, Frank Leslie ; Livingstone, Elizabeth A. (2005).

"Rome (early Christian)" .

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . Oxford University Press. p. 1422.

ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3 .

^ a b Stracke, Richard (20 October 2015).

"Saint Clement: The Iconography" .

Christian Iconography .

^ Bernhard Gallistl: 'Klemens von Rom und sein Kult auf der Krim'. In: Würzburger Jahrbücher für die Altertumswissenschaft. NF, vol.45, 2021, pp. 101–143.

^ a b McBrien (2000).

Lives of the Popes . HarperCollins. p. 35.

^ "Clement of Rome, St." Cross, F. L. (ed.), The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church, (New York: Oxford University Press, 2005).

^ a b Cross, Frank Leslie ; Livingstone, Elizabeth A. (2005).

"bishop" .

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . Oxford University Press. p. 210.

ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3 .

^ Ehrman, Bart D (2008).

Peter, Paul, and Mary Magdalene: The Followers of Jesus in History and Legend . Oxford University Press. p. 83.

ISBN 978-0-19-534350-2 .

^ a b c Downs, David J. (2013).

"Justification, Good Works, and Creation in Clement of Rome's Appropriation of Romans 5–6" .

New Testament Studies .

59 (3): 415– 432.

doi : 10.1017/S0028688513000040 .

ISSN 0028-6885 .

S2CID 170840708 .

^ "Did the Early Church Teach 'Faith Alone'?" .

Zondervan Academic . Retrieved 31 December 2021 .

^ "Philip Schaff: History of the Christian Church, Volume II: Ante-Nicene Christianity. A.D. 100-325 - Christian Classics Ethereal Library" .

www.ccel.org . Retrieved 21 January 2022 .

^ a b Schreiner, Thomas R. (15 September 2015).

Faith Alone---The Doctrine of Justification: What the Reformers Taught...and Why It Still Matters . Zondervan Academic.

ISBN 978-0-310-51579-1 .

^ Mirus, Jeffrey.

"...and Protects His Church from Teaching Error in Faith and Morals' " .

www.ewtn.com/ . Eternal Word Television Network . Retrieved 6 January 2022 .

^ John Meyendorff (1992).

The Primacy of Peter: Essays in Ecclesiology and the Early Church . 135-136. St. Vladimir's Seminary Press.

ISBN 978-0-88141-125-6 .

^ "Christians Have Always Recognized the Pope's Authority — Here's Proof From the 1st Century" . National Catholic Register. 18 September 2021 . Retrieved 6 January 2022 .

Clement definitely asserts his authority over the Corinthian church far away… That is extraordinary, and very similar to what we see in the Jerusalem Council in Acts 15:28 ("For it has seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things") and in Scripture itself… infallibility (divine protection from error and the pope as a unique representative of God).

^ "Authority of the Pope" .

www.churchfathers.org/ . Church Fathers Organization . Retrieved 6 January 2022 .

You will afford us joy and gladness if being obedient to the things which we have written through the Holy Spirit, you will root out the wicked passion of jealousy ^ Cf. Downs, " Justification, Good Works, and Creation in Clement of Rome's Appropriation of Romans 5–6 ," in New Testament Studies .

^ Eusebius Pamphilius 325 .

Book 3, Chapter 16 .

^ Jerome, De Viris Illustribus , Chapter 15 ^ Clement of Rome (1885).

"Ch. XXX Two Epistles Concerning Virginity: Introductory Notice." .

The Ante-Nicene Fathers : translations of the writings of the Fathers down to A.D. 325 . Vol. VIII. Buffalo: C.L. Pub. Co. p. 53.

^ Encyclopædia Britannica: False Decretals ^ Bunson 2004 , p. 345.

^ Cross, Frank Leslie ; Livingstone, Elizabeth A. (2005).

"False Decretals" .

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . Oxford University Press. p. 601.

ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3 .

^ "The Calendar" .

The Church of England . Retrieved 27 March 2021 .

^ Lesser Feasts and Fasts 2018 . Church Publishing, Inc. 17 December 2019.

ISBN 978-1-64065-235-4 .

^ González 2007 , p. 3.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Pope St. Clement I ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Sources [ edit ] Bunson, Matthew (2004). "False Decretals".

OSV's Encyclopedia of Catholic History . Our Sunday Visitor.

ISBN 978-1-59276-026-8 .

Campbell, Thomas Joseph (1907).

"Pope St. Anacletus" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 1. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Clement of Rome (1885b). Alexander Roberts; James Donaldson (eds.).

"The First Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians" .

Ante-Nicene Fathers . Vol. IX. Translated by John Keith – via Wikisource .

Durant, Will (2011).

The Story of Civilization . Vol. IV: The Age of Faith. Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-1-4516-4761-7 .

Eusebius Pamphilius (325), Ecclesiastical history (PDF) , retrieved 27 November 2012 González, Manuel Hernández (2007).

Fiestas y creencias en Canarias en la Edad Moderna . Ediciones IDEA.

ISBN 978-84-8382-107-7 .

Kelly, John Norman Davidson; Walsh, Michael J. (2005).

The Oxford Dictionary of Popes (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-861433-3 .

Libreria Editrice Vaticana (2008).

Annuario pontificio (2008) . Libreria Editrice Vaticana.

ISBN 978-88-209-8021-4 .

Phan, Peter C. (2000).

The Gift of the Church: A Textbook on Ecclesiology in Honor of Patrick Granfield, O.S.B.

Liturgical Press.

ISBN 978-0-8146-5931-1 .

Further reading [ edit ] Clarke, W. K. Lowther, ed. (1937).

The First Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians . London: Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge.

Grant, Robert M., ed. (1964).

The Apostolic Fathers . New York: Nelson.

Loomis, Louise Ropes (1916).

The Book of Popes ( Liber Pontificalis ). Merchantville, NJ: Evolution Publishing.

ISBN 1-889758-86-8 .

Lightfoot, J.B. (1890).

The Apostolic Fathers . London: Macmillan.

Meeks, Wayne A. (1993).

The origins of Christian morality : the first two centuries . New Haven: Yale Univ. Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-05640-2 .

Richardson, Cyril Charles (1943).

Early Christian Fathers . The Library of Christian Classics. Philadelphia: Westminster Press.

Staniforth, Maxwell (1968).

Early Christian writings . Baltimore: Penguin.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Clemens I .

English Wikisource has original works by and about: Clement I Wikiquote has quotations related to First Epistle of Clement .

Listen to this article ( 18 minutes ) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 1 July 2014 ( 2014-07-01 ) , and does not reflect subsequent edits.

( Audio help · More spoken articles ) "Saint Clement I." Encyclopædia Britannica Online.

Grieve, Alexander James ; Robinson, Joseph Armitage (1911).

"Clement s.v. Clement I." . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

482– 483.

Works by Clement of Rome at the Biodiversity Heritage Library Works by or about Clement of Rome at the Internet Archive Works by Clement of Rome at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Two Epistles Concerning Virginity .

Opera Omnia Hieromartyr Clement the Pope of Rome Eastern Orthodox icon and synaxarion Patron Saints Index: Pope Saint Clement I Saint Clement at the Christian Iconography web site "Here Followeth the Life of St. Clement" in the Caxton translation of the Golden Legend "St. Clement of Rome, Pope and Martyr (1st Century)" Colonnade Statue in St Peter's Square Catholic Church titles Preceded by Anacletus Bishop of Rome 92–100 Succeeded by Evaristus v t e Popes of the Catholic Church List of popes graphical canonised Papal names Tombs extant non-extant Antipope Pope emeritus papal resignation Pope-elect Apocryphal Pope Donus II 1st–4th centuries Peter Linus Anacletus Clement I Evaristus Alexander I Sixtus I Telesphorus Hyginus Pius I Anicetus Soter Eleutherius Victor I Zephyrinus Callixtus I Urban I Pontian Anterus Fabian Cornelius Lucius I Stephen I Sixtus II Dionysius Felix I Eutychian Caius Marcellinus Marcellus I Eusebius Miltiades Sylvester I Mark Julius I Liberius Damasus I Siricius Anastasius I 5th–8th centuries Innocent I Zosimus Boniface I Celestine I Sixtus III Leo I Hilarius Simplicius Felix III Gelasius I Anastasius II Symmachus Hormisdas John I Felix IV Boniface II John II Agapetus I Silverius Vigilius Pelagius I John III Benedict I Pelagius II Gregory I Sabinian Boniface III Boniface IV Adeodatus I Boniface V Honorius I Severinus John IV Theodore I Martin I Eugene I Vitalian Adeodatus II Donus Agatho Leo II Benedict II John V Conon Sergius I John VI John VII Sisinnius Constantine Gregory II Gregory III Zachary Stephen II Paul I Stephen III Adrian I Leo III 9th–12th centuries Stephen IV Paschal I Eugene II Valentine Gregory IV Sergius II Leo IV Benedict III Nicholas I Adrian II John VIII Marinus I Adrian III Stephen V Formosus Boniface VI Stephen VI Romanus Theodore II John IX Benedict IV Leo V Sergius III Anastasius III Lando John X Leo VI Stephen VII John XI Leo VII Stephen VIII Marinus II Agapetus II John XII Benedict V Leo VIII John XIII Benedict VI Benedict VII John XIV John XV Gregory V Sylvester II John XVII John XVIII Sergius IV Benedict VIII John XIX Benedict IX Sylvester III Gregory VI Clement II Damasus II Leo IX Victor II Stephen IX Nicholas II Alexander II Gregory VII Victor III Urban II Paschal II Gelasius II Callixtus II Honorius II Innocent II Celestine II Lucius II Eugene III Anastasius IV Adrian IV Alexander III Lucius III Urban III Gregory VIII Clement III Celestine III Innocent III 13th–16th centuries Honorius III Gregory IX Celestine IV Innocent IV Alexander IV Urban IV Clement IV Gregory X Innocent V Adrian V John XXI Nicholas III Martin IV Honorius IV Nicholas IV Celestine V Boniface VIII Benedict XI Clement V John XXII Benedict XII Clement VI Innocent VI Urban V Gregory XI Urban VI Boniface IX Innocent VII Gregory XII Martin V Eugene IV Nicholas V Callixtus III Pius II Paul II Sixtus IV Innocent VIII Alexander VI Pius III Julius II Leo X Adrian VI Clement VII Paul III Julius III Marcellus II Paul IV Pius IV Pius V Gregory XIII Sixtus V Urban VII Gregory XIV Innocent IX Clement VIII 17th–21st centuries Leo XI Paul V Gregory XV Urban VIII Innocent X Alexander VII Clement IX Clement X Innocent XI Alexander VIII Innocent XII Clement XI Innocent XIII Benedict XIII Clement XII Benedict XIV Clement XIII Clement XIV Pius VI Pius VII Leo XII Pius VIII Gregory XVI Pius IX Leo XIII Pius X Benedict XV Pius XI Pius XII John XXIII Paul VI John Paul I John Paul II Benedict XVI Francis Leo XIV History of the papacy Antiquity and Early Middle Ages During the Roman Empire (until 493) Under Constantine (312–337) Ostrogothic Papacy (493–537) Byzantine Papacy (537–752) Frankish Papacy (756–857) Saeculum obscurum (904–964) Crescentii era (974–1012) High and Late Middle Ages Tusculan Papacy (1012–1044 / 1048) Conflicts with the HRE (1048–1257) Wandering Papacy Viterbo , 1257–1281 Orvieto , 1262–1297 Perugia , 1228–1304 Avignon Papacy (1309–1378) Western Schism (1378–1417) Early Modern and Modern Era Renaissance Papacy (1417–1534) Reformation Papacy (1534–1585) Baroque Papacy (1585–1689) Age of Enlightenment (c. 1640–1740) Revolutionary Papacy (1775–1848) Roman question (1870–1929) Vatican City (1929–present) World War II (1939–1945) Cold War (1945–1991) Category Portal Links to related articles v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal v t e History of Christianity Spread History of theology Historicity of the Bible List of martyrs Timeline Centuries 1st 2nd and 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st Early Christianity Origins and Apostolic Age Background Chronology of Jesus birth baptism ministry crucifixion resurrection Great Commission ascension historical Jesus Holy Spirit Apostles in the New Testament Jewish Christianity Split Paul the Apostle Council of Jerusalem Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period Diversity Adoptionism Arianism Docetism Donatism Gnosticism Marcionism Montanism Canon development Persecution Apostolic / Church Fathers Clement of Rome Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Tertullian Origen Great Church Early African Late antiquity Constantine Constantinian shift Roman state religion Monasticism Councils Nicaea I Creed Christianity Athanasius Jerome Augustine Constantinople I Ephesus I Chalcedon Chalcedonian / Non-Chalcedonian Biblical canon Catholicism ( Timeline ) Papacy Development of primacy Eastern Orthodox opposition Peace and Truce of God Crusading movement Lateran IV Art patronage of Julius II Leo X Counter-Reformation Trent Art Catholic Reformation Jesuits Xavier Thomas More Monastery dissolution Wars Mass rocks and priest holes Guadalupe Jansenists Molinists Neo-Scholasticism Teresa Modernism Independent Catholics Vatican I and Vatican II Ecclesial community Eastern Christianity Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Church of the East Chrysostom Nestorianism Icons Iconodulism Iconoclasm Great Schism Fall of Constantinople Armenia Georgia Greece Egypt Syriac Ethiopia Ottoman Empire Bulgaria Russia Serbia North America Middle Ages Pelagianism Gregory I Celtic Germanic Anglo-Saxon Franks Gothic Scandinavian Iceland Slavs Bohemia Bulgaria Kievan Rus' Moravia Poland Pomerania Investiture Anselm Abelard Bernard Bogomils Bosnian Cathars Apostolic Brethren Dulcinian Crusades Waldensians Inquisition Early Scholasticism Christian mysticism Dominic Francis Bonaventure Aquinas Five Ways Wycliffe Avignon Papal Schism Bohemian Reformation Hus Conciliarism Synods Reformation and Protestantism Erasmus Eucharist Calvinist–Arminian debate Arminianism Wars Resistance theories Separation of church and state Nicodemites Hymnody of continental Europe Formal and material principles Law and Gospel Literature Protestant work ethic Lutheranism Luther Ninety-five Theses Diet of Worms Theology Bible Melanchthon Book of Concord Orthodoxy Eucharist Art Calvinism Zwingli Calvin Huguenots Presbyterianism Scotland Knox TULIP Baptism Dort Three Forms of Unity Westminster Orthodoxy Metrical psalters Anglicanism ( Timeline ) Henry VIII Cranmer Elizabethan 39 Articles Puritans Civil War Church music Book of Common Prayer King James Version Anabaptism Theology Radical Reformation Grebel Swiss Brethren Müntzer Martyrs' Synod Menno Simons Smyth Martyrs Mirror Ausbund 1640–1789 Revivalism Missionaries timeline Baptists Separation of church and state Edicts of toleration Congregationalism First Great Awakening Methodism Millerism Pietism Fostering of early experimental science Neo- and Old Lutherans 1789–present Camp meeting Holiness movement Second Great Awakening Restorationists Jehovah's Witnesses Mormonism Seventh-day Adventist Adventism Oxford Movement Laestadianism Finnish Awakening Christian existentialism Third Great Awakening Azusa Revival Gospel music Fundamentalist – Modernist controversy Pacifism Ecumenism Five solae Jesus movement Pentecostalism Charismatics Liberation theology Reformed epistemology Fourth Great Awakening Evangelical and Mainline Protestants Christian right and left Political influence of Evangelicalism in Latin America Portals : Biography Catholicism Vatican City Saints Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal 2 Netherlands Norway Croatia Chile Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐kbbtm
Cached time: 20250817043819
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.513 seconds
Real time usage: 1.817 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9220/1000000
Revision size: 46484/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 336942/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 76383/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 237443/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.936/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18803431/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1481.556      1 -total
 25.60%  379.342      2 Template:Reflist
 12.81%  189.860     29 Template:Cite_book
  8.94%  132.519     12 Template:Cite_web
  8.51%  126.049      3 Template:Sister_project
  8.40%  124.392      3 Template:Side_box
  7.85%  116.347      2 Template:Langx
  6.34%   93.975      1 Template:Infobox_Christian_leader
  5.94%   87.947      1 Template:Infobox
  5.30%   78.544      1 Template:Wikisource Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:49799:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043819 and revision id 1305125038. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Clement_of_Rome&oldid=1305125038 " Categories : Clement of Rome 99 deaths 1st-century births 1st-century Christian martyrs 1st-century Christian theologians 1st-century popes 1st-century Romans 1st-century writers Anglican saints Burials at the Far Caves, Kyiv Pechersk Lavra Christian slaves and freedmen Church Fathers Clergy from Rome Eastern Orthodox saints Italian popes Papal saints People executed by drowning People in the Pauline epistles Popes Roman Catholic writers Hidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2025 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with hAudio microformats Spoken articles Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference BHL ID same as Wikidata Articles with Biodiversity Heritage Library links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Pages using S-rel template with ca parameter Year of birth unknown Year of death uncertain This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 05:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Clement of Rome 94 languages Add topic

