Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Association with Isaac Newton 3 Sources 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents William Clarke (apothecary) 1 language Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia William Clarke Born abt. April 1609 England Died aft. 1 June 1671 Leicestershire, England Occupation Apothecary Spouse(s) Martha (last name unknown) (1st); Katherine Babington Storer (2nd) William Clarke ( c.

April 1609 – 1671) was an apothecary who provided lodgings for a young Isaac Newton whilst he attended the King's School in Grantham .

Biography [ edit ] William was baptised on 23 April 1609. According to his will, he had a brother Joseph, but little else is known about his early life. William Clarke was married twice, first to Martha (last name is unknown) who bore him three children - Joseph, William and Anne. His second marriage was to Katherine Babington , widow, who was from the same line as Anthony Babington . Katherine had three children from a previous marriage to Edward Storer, including daughter Katherine as well as sons Edward and Arthur Storer . Together, Katherine and William had two more children named John and Martha. All of his sons except John followed him into the trade of apothecary. Clarke eventually retired to Loughborough in Leicestershire , leaving his business to his son, William.

[ 1 ] During the English Civil War , William sided with the parliamentarians . The town of Grantham was captured by Royalists on 23 March 1643 [ 2 ] and on 11 April he was indicted for high treason.  On 11 May 1643, however the town was recaptured by Oliver Cromwell [ 2 ] and Clarke was released. Following the war William attained wealth and landholdings, but lost much of his fortune following the restoration .

Association with Isaac Newton [ edit ] In 1654, William provided boarding to Isaac Newton as he would be attending the King's School with Edward and Arthur Storer. Newton's mother remained in Woolsthorpe-by-Colsterworth , which was about eight miles away from the Clarke residence. Many of Newton's biographers have noted that it was the lessons learned from Clarke that sparked Newton's interest in chemistry.

According to the Clarke's grandson, Ralph Clarke, also an apothecary in Grantham, Newton left signs of his presence in the garret where he slept in the apothecary's house on Grantham's High Street: he carved his name into the boards, and drew charcoal drawings of birds and beasts, men and ships, and abstract shapes on the walls. Newton was said to have had 'a passion' for Clarke's step-daughter, Katherine Storer (later Mrs. Vincent).

Sources [ edit ] E. T. Bell , Men of Mathematics (1937, Simon and Schuster) H. Eves, An Introduction to the History of Mathematics (1976).

V. Horry, The Clark Family History . (2002) J. D. Trabue, "Ann and Arthur Storer of Calvert County, Maryland, Friends of Sir Isaac Newton, With the Descendants of Clarke Skinner of Calvert County" (2004).

References [ edit ] ^ "William Clarke's Will" .

horry.org . Retrieved 7 January 2021 .

^ a b Manganiello, Stephen C. (2004).

The concise encyclopaedia of the revolutions and wars of England, Scotland, and Ireland, 1639-1660 . Lanham, Md.: The Scarecrow Press. p. 231.

ISBN 978-0-8108-5100-9 .

External links [ edit ] Isaac Newton, the early years Text of William Clarke's will from June, 1671 v t e Sir Isaac Newton Publications Fluxions (1671) De Motu (1684) Principia (1687) Opticks (1704) Queries (1704) Arithmetica (1707) De Analysi (1711) Other writings Quaestiones (1661–1665) " standing on the shoulders of giants " (1675) Notes on the Jewish Temple (c. 1680) " General Scholium " (1713; " hypotheses non fingo " ) Ancient Kingdoms Amended (1728) Corruptions of Scripture (1754) Contributions Calculus fluxion Impact depth Inertia Newton disc Newton polygon Newton–Okounkov body Newton's reflector Newtonian telescope Newton scale Newton's metal Spectrum Structural coloration Newtonianism Bucket argument Newton's inequalities Newton's law of cooling Newton's law of universal gravitation post-Newtonian expansion parameterized gravitational constant Newton–Cartan theory Schrödinger–Newton equation Newton's laws of motion Kepler's laws Newtonian dynamics Newton's method in optimization Apollonius's problem truncated Newton method Gauss–Newton algorithm Newton's rings Newton's theorem about ovals Newton–Pepys problem Newtonian potential Newtonian fluid Classical mechanics Corpuscular theory of light Leibniz–Newton calculus controversy Newton's notation Rotating spheres Newton's cannonball Newton–Cotes formulas Newton's method generalized Gauss–Newton method Newton fractal Newton's identities Newton polynomial Newton's theorem of revolving orbits Newton–Euler equations Newton number kissing number problem Newton's quotient Parallelogram of force Newton–Puiseux theorem Absolute space and time Luminiferous aether Newtonian series table Personal life Woolsthorpe Manor (birthplace) Cranbury Park (home) Early life Later life Apple tree Religious views Occult studies Scientific Revolution Copernican Revolution Relations Catherine Barton (niece) John Conduitt (nephew-in-law) Isaac Barrow (professor) William Clarke (mentor) Benjamin Pulleyn (tutor) Roger Cotes (student) William Whiston (student) John Keill (disciple) William Stukeley (friend) William Jones (friend) Abraham de Moivre (friend) Depictions Newton by Blake (monotype) Newton by Paolozzi (sculpture) Isaac Newton Gargoyle Astronomers Monument Namesake Newton (unit) Newton's cradle Isaac Newton Institute Isaac Newton Medal Isaac Newton Telescope Isaac Newton Group of Telescopes XMM-Newton Sir Isaac Newton Sixth Form Statal Institute of Higher Education Isaac Newton Newton International Fellowship Categories Isaac Newton Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=William_Clarke_(apothecary)&oldid=1298341714 " Categories : 1609 births 1682 deaths Apothecaries People from Grantham Roundheads Isaac Newton Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from April 2022 Pages using infobox person with multiple spouses Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 22:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents William Clarke (apothecary) 1 language Add topic

