Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Meaning 2 Background 3 Painting Toggle Painting subsection 3.1 Verists and classicists 3.2 Regional groups 4 Photography 5 Architecture 6 Film 7 Literature 8 Theater 9 Music 10 Legacy 11 Notes 12 See also 13 References 14 External links Toggle the table of contents New Objectivity 37 languages Alemannisch العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1920s German art movement against expressionism For the architectural aspects of this movement, see New Objectivity (architecture) .

Made in Germany ( Den macht uns keiner nach ), by George Grosz, drawn in pen 1919, photo-lithograph published 1920 in the portfolio God with us ( Gott mit Uns ). Sheet 48.3 × 39.1 cm. In the collection of the MoMA , New York.

The New Objectivity (in German : Neue Sachlichkeit ) was a movement in German art that arose during the 1920s as a reaction against expressionism . The term was coined by Gustav Friedrich Hartlaub , the director of the Kunsthalle in Mannheim , who used it as the title of an art exhibition staged in 1925 to showcase artists who were working in a post-expressionist spirit.

[ 1 ] As these artists—who included Max Beckmann , Otto Dix , Adolf Dietrich , George Grosz , Christian Schad , Rudolf Schlichter , Georg Scholz and Jeanne Mammen —rejected the self-involvement and romantic longings of the expressionists, Weimar intellectuals in general made a call to arms for public collaboration, engagement, and rejection of romantic idealism.

Although principally describing a tendency in German painting, the term took a life of its own and came to characterize the attitude of public life in Weimar Germany as well as the art, literature, music, and architecture created to adapt to it. Rather than some goal of philosophical objectivity, it was meant to imply a turn towards practical engagement with the world—an all-business attitude, understood by Germans as intrinsically American.

[ 1 ] The movement essentially ended in 1933 with the end of the Weimar Republic and the beginning of the Nazi dictatorship.

Meaning [ edit ] Although "New Objectivity" has been the most common translation of "Neue Sachlichkeit", other translations have included "New Matter-of-factness", "New Resignation", "New Sobriety", and "New Dispassion". The art historian Dennis Crockett says there is no direct English translation, and breaks down the meaning in the original German: Sachlichkeit should be understood by its root, Sache , meaning "thing", "fact", "subject", or "object." Sachlich could be best understood as "factual", "matter-of-fact", "impartial", "practical", or "precise"; Sachlichkeit is the noun form of the adjective/adverb and usually implies "matter-of-factness".

[ 2 ] In particular, Crockett argues against the view implied by the translation of "New Resignation", which he says is a popular misunderstanding of the attitude it describes. The idea that it conveys resignation comes from the notion that the age of great socialist revolutions was over and that the left-leaning intellectuals who were living in Germany at the time wanted to adapt themselves to the social order represented in the Weimar Republic. Crockett says the art of the Neue Sachlichkeit was meant to be more forward in political action than the modes of Expressionism it was turning against: "The Neue Sachlichkeit is Americanism, cult of the objective, the hard fact, the predilection for functional work, professional conscientiousness, and usefulness." [ 1 ] Background [ edit ] Main article: Post-expressionism Leading up to World War I , much of the art world was under the influence of Futurism and Expressionism , both of which abandoned any sense of order or commitment to objectivity or tradition. Expressionism was in particular the dominant form of art in Germany, and it was represented in many different facets of public life—in dance, in theater, in painting, in architecture, in poetry, and in literature.

Expressionists abandoned nature and sought to express emotional experience, often centering their art around inner turmoil (angst), whether in reaction to the modern world, to alienation from society, or in the creation of personal identity. In concert with this evocation of angst and unease with bourgeois life, expressionists also echoed some of the same feelings of revolution as did Futurists. This is evidenced by a 1919 anthology of expressionist poetry titled Menschheitsdämmerung , which translates to “Twilight of Humanity”—meant to suggest that humanity was in a twilight; that there was an imminent demise of some old way of being and beneath it the urgings of a new dawning.

[ 3 ] Critics of expressionism came from many circles. From the left, a strong critique began with Dadaism . The early exponents of Dada had been drawn together in Switzerland, a neutral country in the war, and seeing their common cause, wanted to use their art as a form of moral and cultural protest—they saw shaking off the constraints of artistic language in the same way they saw their refusal of national boundaries. They wanted to use their art in order to express political outrage and encourage political action.

[ 3 ] Expressionism, to Dadaists, expressed all of the angst and anxieties of society, but was helpless to do anything about it.

Bertolt Brecht , a German dramatist, launched another early critique of expressionism, referring to it as constrained and superficial. Just as in politics Germany had a new parliament but lacked parliamentarians, he argued, in literature there was an expression of delight in ideas, but no new ideas, and in theater a "will to drama", but no real drama. His early plays, Baal and Trommeln in der Nacht (Drums in the Night) express repudiations of fashionable interest in Expressionism.

After the destruction of the war, more conservative critics gained force particularly in their critique of the style of expressionism. Throughout Europe a return to order in the arts resulted in neoclassical works by modernists such as Picasso and Stravinsky , and a turn away from abstraction by many artists, for example Matisse and Metzinger . The return to order was especially pervasive in Italy.

Because of travel restrictions, German artists in 1919–1922 had little knowledge of contemporary trends in French art; Henri Rousseau , who died in 1910, was the French painter whose influence was most apparent in the works of the New Objectivity.

[ 4 ] However, some of the Germans found important inspiration in the pages of the Italian magazine Valori plastici , which featured photographs of recent paintings by Italian classical realists.

[ 4 ] Painting [ edit ] Verists and classicists [ edit ] Georg Scholz , War Veterans' Association (1922) Alexander Kanoldt , Still Life with Jugs and Red Tea Caddy (1922) Hartlaub first used the term in 1923 in a letter he sent to colleagues describing an exhibition he was planning.

[ 5 ] In his subsequent article, "Introduction to 'New Objectivity': German Painting since Expressionism",  Hartlaub explained, what we are displaying here is distinguished by the—in itself purely external—characteristics of the objectivity with which the artists express themselves.

[ 6 ] The New Objectivity was composed of two tendencies which Hartlaub characterized in terms of a left and right wing: on the left were the verists , who "tear the objective form of the world of contemporary facts and represent current experience in its tempo and fevered temperature"; and on the right the classicists , who "search more for the object of timeless ability to embody the external laws of existence in the artistic sphere".

[ 6 ] The verists' vehement form of realism emphasized the ugly and sordid.

[ 7 ] Their art was raw, provocative, and harshly satirical.

George Grosz and Otto Dix are considered the most important of the verists.

[ 8 ] The verists developed Dada's abandonment of any pictorial rules or artistic language into a “satirical hyperrealism”, as termed by Raoul Hausmann , and of which the best known examples are the graphical works and photo-montages of John Heartfield . Use of collage in these works became a compositional principle to blend reality and art, as if to suggest that to record the facts of reality was to go beyond the most simple appearances of things.

[ 3 ] Artists such as Grosz, Dix, Georg Scholz , and Rudolf Schlichter painted satirical scenes that often depicted a madness behind what was happening, depicting the participants as cartoon-like. When painting portraits, they gave emphasis to particular features or objects that were seen as distinctive aspects of the person depicted.

Other verists, like Christian Schad , depicted reality with a clinical precision, which suggested both an empirical detachment and intimate knowledge of the subject. Schad's paintings are characterized by "an artistic perception so sharp that it seems to cut beneath the skin", according to the art critic Wieland Schmied.

[ 9 ] Often, psychological elements were introduced in his work, which suggested an underlying unconscious reality.

Max Beckmann , who is sometimes called an expressionist although he never considered himself part of any movement, [ 10 ] was considered by Hartlaub  to be a verist [ 11 ] and the most important artist of Neue Sachlichkeit .

[ 12 ] Compared to the verists, the classicists more clearly exemplify the "return to order" that arose in the arts throughout Europe. The classicists included Georg Schrimpf , Alexander Kanoldt , Carlo Mense , Heinrich Maria Davringhausen , and Wilhelm Heise .

[ 11 ] The sources of their inspiration included 19th-century art, the Italian metaphysical painters , the artists of Novecento Italiano , and Henri Rousseau.

[ 13 ] The classicists are best understood by Franz Roh 's term Magic Realism , though Roh originally intended "magical realism" to be synonymous with the Neue Sachlichkeit as a whole.

[ 14 ] For Roh, as a reaction to expressionism, the idea was to declare "[that] the autonomy of the objective world around us was once more to be enjoyed; the wonder of matter that could crystallize into objects was to be seen anew." [ 15 ] With the term, he was emphasizing the "magic" of the normal world as it presents itself to us—how, when we really look at everyday objects, they can appear strange and fantastic.

Regional groups [ edit ] Hans Mertens, Card Players , 1929 Most of the artists of the New Objectivity did not travel widely, and stylistic tendencies were related to geography. While the classicists were based mostly in Munich , the verists worked mainly in Berlin (Grosz, Dix, Schlichter, and Schad); Dresden (Dix, Hans Grundig , Wilhelm Lachnit and others); and Karlsruhe ( Karl Hubbuch , Georg Scholz , and Wilhelm Schnarrenberger ).

[ 11 ] The works of the Karlsruhe artists emphasize a hard, precise style of drawing, as in Hubbuch's watercolor The Cologne Swimmer (1923).

[ 16 ] In Cologne , a constructivist group led by Franz Wilhelm Seiwert and Heinrich Hoerle also included Gerd Arntz . Also from Cologne was Anton Räderscheidt , who after a brief constructivist phase became influenced by Antonio Donghi and the metaphysical artists.

Artists active in Hanover , such as Grethe Jürgens , Hans Mertens , Ernst Thoms , and Erich Wegner , depicted provincial subject matter with an often lyrical style.

[ 17 ] Franz Radziwill , who painted ominous landscapes, lived in relative isolation in Dangast , a small coastal town.

[ 18 ] Carl Grossberg became a painter after studying architecture in Aachen and Darmstadt and is noted for his clinical rendering of industrial technology.

[ 19 ] Photography [ edit ] Albert Renger-Patzsch and August Sander are leading representatives of the "New Photography " movement, which brought a sharply focused, documentary quality to the photographic art where previously the self-consciously poetic had held sway.

[ 20 ] Some other related projects as Neues Sehen , coexisted at the same moment.

Karl Blossfeldt 's botanical photography is also often described as being a variation on New Objectivity.

[ 21 ] Architecture [ edit ] Panorama of the IG Farben Building from the south, demonstrating how the curved shape of the building's façade reduces the impact of its scale Main article: New Objectivity (architecture) New Objectivity in architecture, as in painting and literature, describes German work of the transitional years of the early 1920s in the Weimar culture , as a direct reaction to the stylistic excesses of Expressionist architecture and the change in the national mood.  Architects such as Bruno Taut , Erich Mendelsohn and Hans Poelzig turned to New Objectivity's straightforward, functionally minded, matter-of-fact approach to construction, which became known in Germany as Neues Bauen ("New Building"). The Neues Bauen movement, flourishing in the brief period between the adoption of the Dawes plan and the rise of the Nazis , encompassed public exhibitions like the Weissenhof Estate , the massive urban planning and public housing projects of Taut and Ernst May , and the influential experiments at the Bauhaus .

Film [ edit ] Main article: New Objectivity (film) In film, New Objectivity reached its high point around 1929. As a cinematic style, it translated into realistic settings, straightforward camerawork and editing, a tendency to examine inanimate objects as a way to interpret characters and events, a lack of overt emotionalism, and social themes.

The director most associated with the movement is Georg Wilhelm Pabst . Pabst's films of the 1920s concentrate on social issues such as abortion , prostitution , labor disputes, homosexuality , and addiction . His cool and critical 1925 Joyless Street is a landmark of the objective style. Other directors included Ernő Metzner , Berthold Viertel , and Gerhard Lamprecht .

Literature [ edit ] The primary characteristic of New Objective literature was its political perspective on reality.

[ 22 ] It renders dystopias , in a non-sentimental, emotionless reporting style, with precision of detail and veneration for "the fact". The works were seen to provide a rejection to humanism, a refusal to play the game of art as utopia, a negation of art as escapism , and a palpable cynicism about humanity.

[ 23 ] Authors associated with New Objectivity literature included Alfred Döblin , Hans Fallada , Irmgard Keun , Erich Kästner , and, in Afrikaans literature , Abraham Jonker, the father of poet Ingrid Jonker .

Theater [ edit ] Bertolt Brecht , from his opposition to the focus on the individual in expressionist art, began a collaborative method to play production, starting with his Man Equals Man project.

[ 24 ] This approach to theater-craft began to be known as "Brechtian" and the collective of writers and actors who he worked with are known as the "Brechtian collective".

Music [ edit ] See also: Neoclassicism (music) New Objectivity in music, as in the visual arts, rejected the sentimentality of late Romanticism and the emotional agitation of expressionism. Composer Paul Hindemith may be considered both a New Objectivist and an expressionist, depending on the composition, throughout the 1920s; for example, his wind quintet Kleine Kammermusik Op. 24 No. 2 (1922) was designed as Gebrauchsmusik ; one may compare his operas Sancta Susanna (part of an expressionist trilogy) and Neues vom Tage (a parody of modern life).

[ 25 ] His music typically harkens back to baroque models and makes use of traditional forms and stable polyphonic structures, together with modern dissonance and jazz -inflected rhythms.

Ernst Toch and Kurt Weill also composed New Objectivist music during the 1920s. Though known late in life for his austere interpretations of the classics, in earlier years, conductor Otto Klemperer was the most prominent to ally himself with this movement.

Legacy [ edit ] The New Objectivity movement is usually considered to have ended with the Weimar Republic when the National Socialists under Adolf Hitler seized power in January 1933.

[ 26 ] The Nazi authorities condemned much of the work of the New Objectivity as " degenerate art ", so that works were seized and destroyed and many artists were forbidden to exhibit. A few, including Karl Hubbuch , Adolf Uzarski , and Otto Nagel , were among the artists entirely forbidden to paint. While some of the major figures of the movement went into exile , they did not carry on painting in the same manner. George Grosz emigrated to America and adopted a romantic style, and Max Beckmann's work by the time he left Germany in 1937 was, by Franz Roh 's definitions, expressionism.

The influence of New Objectivity outside of Germany can be seen in the work of artists like Balthus , Salvador Dalí (in such early works as his Portrait of Luis Buñuel of 1924), [ 27 ] Auguste Herbin , Maruja Mallo , Cagnaccio di San Pietro , Grant Wood , Adamson-Eric , and Juhan Muks .

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Crockett p. 1 ^ Crockett, p. xix ^ a b c Midgley 2000, p. 15 ^ a b Crockett p. 15 ^ Roh et al. 1997, p. 285 ^ a b Kaes et al. 1994, p. 492 ^ Michalsky 1994, p. 20 ^ Michalsky 1994, p. 27 ^ Schmied 1978, p. 19 ^ Schmied 1978, pp. 23–24 ^ a b c Schmied 1978, p. 10 ^ Michalsky 1994, p. 147 ^ Schmied 1978, p. 11 ^ Schmied 1978, p. 9 ^ Zamora and Faris 1995 ^ Michalski 1994, pp. 90, 96 ^ Michalski 1994, pp. 135–136 ^ Michalski 1994, p. 153 ^ Michalski 1994, p. 169 ^ Michalski 1994, pp. 181, 188 ^ "Karl Blossfeldt" . Art Gallery NSW . Retrieved 31 May 2014 .

^ Stoehr 2001, p. 99 ^ Beaumont 2010, p. 151 ^ Midgley 2000, p. 16 ^ Albright 2004, p. 278 ^ Schmied 1978, p. 31 ^ Roh et al. 1997, p. 291 See also [ edit ] History of Painting Western Painting References [ edit ] Albright, Daniel, ed. (2004).

Modernism and Music: an anthology of sources . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-01267-0 Becker, Sabina (2000).

Neue Sachlichkeit . Köln: Böhlau. Print.

Beaumont, M. (2010).

A concise companion to realism . Malden, Mass.: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 1444332074 Crockett, Dennis (1999).

German Post-Expressionism: the Art of the Great Disorder 1918-1924 . University Park, Pa.: Pennsylvania State University Press.

ISBN 0271017961 Grüttemeier, Ralf; Beekman, Klaus; Rebel, Ben, eds. (2013).

Neue Sachlichkeit and Avant-Garde . Avant-Garde Critical Studies 29. Amsterdam / New York: Rodopi.

Kaes, Anton; Jay, Martin; Dimendberg, Edward, eds (1994).

The Weimar Republic Sourcebook . Berkeley: University of California Press.

ISBN 0520067754 Lethen, Helmut (1970).

Neue Sachlichkeit 1924-1932: Studien zur Literatur des "Weissen Sozialismus." Stuttgart: Metzler.

Lindner, Martin (1994).

Leben in der Krise. Zeitromane der neuen Sachlichkeit und die intellektuelle Mentalität der klassischen Moderne . Stuttgart: Metzler.

Michalski, Sergiusz (1994).

New Objectivity . Cologne: Benedikt Taschen.

ISBN 3-8228-9650-0 Midgley, David (2000).

Writing Weimar: Critical Realism in German Literature, 1918-1933 . Durham and London: Oxford University Press.

Roh, Franz, Juan Manuel Bonet, Miguel Blesa De La Parra, and Martin Chirino (1997).

Realismo mágico: Franz Roh y la pintura europea 1917-1936 : [exposición] Ivam Centre Julio Gonzalez, [Valencia], 19 junio - 31 agosto 1997 : Fundación Caja de Madrid, Madrid, 17 septiembre - 9 noviembre 1997 : Centro Atlantico de Arte Moderno, [Gran Canaria], 2 diciembre 1997 - 1 febrero 1998 . Valencia: Ivam, Institut Valencià d'Art Modern.

OCLC 38962637 (Spanish and English) Schmied, Wieland (1978).

Neue Sachlichkeit and German Realism of the Twenties . London: Arts Council of Great Britain.

ISBN 0-7287-0184-7 Stoehr, Ingo R. (2001).

German Literature of the Twentieth Century: From Aestheticism to Postmodernism . Rochester, NY: Camden House.

ISBN 1571131574 Willett, John (1978).

The New Sobriety: art and politics in the Weimar Period,  1917-1933 . London: Thames & Hudson (Reissued by Da Capo Press, New York, 1996 as "Art and Politics in the Weimar Period" ISBN 0-306-80724-6 ) Zamora, Lois Parkinson and Faris, Wendy B., eds. (1995).

Magical Realism: Theory, History, Community . Durham and London: Duke University Press.

External links [ edit ] Fritz Schmalenbach essay Tate modern definition Neue Sachlichkeit (New Objectivity) Image Library Chaos and Classicism: Art in France, Italy, and Germany, 1918–1936.

The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum. October 1, 2010 – January 9, 2011.

Table of Contents book Neue Sachlichkeit and Avant-Garde . Amsterdam / New York 2013. Brill/Rodopi The Essence of Magic Realism - Critical Study of the origins and development of Magic Realism in art.

v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category v t e German-language literature Related articles German language History of Germany History of Austria History of Switzerland History of Liechtenstein Old High German literature Middle High German literature Early New High German literature Sturm und Drang Weimar Classicism Romanticism Literary realism Weimar culture Exilliteratur Pop literature Austrian literature Swiss literature German studies Related categories Austrian writers German writers Liechtenstein writers Swiss writers in German Category:Translators of William Shakespeare Reformation era literature Medieval Minnesang Courtly romance Der von Kürenberg Dietmar von Aist Reinmar von Hagenau Hartmann von Aue Walther von der Vogelweide Wolfram von Eschenbach Albrecht von Johansdorf Heinrich von Morungen Gottfried von Strassburg Dietrich von Bern Nibelungenlied Early modern Simon Dach Paul Fleming Hans Folz Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen Andreas Gryphius Christian Hoffmann von Hoffmannswaldau Johann Michael Moscherosch Martin Opitz Hans Sachs Angelus Silesius Anthony Ulrich, Duke of Brunswick Georg Wickram 18th century Barthold Heinrich Brockes Christian Gellert Johann Wolfgang von Goethe Johann Christoph Gottsched Johann Christian Günther Friedrich Hölderlin Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock Meta Klopstock Jakob Michael Reinhold Lenz Gotthold Ephraim Lessing Magnus Gottfried Lichtwer Novalis (Friedrich von Hardenberg) Jean Paul Friedrich Schiller Johann Gottfried Schnabel Christoph Martin Wieland 19th century Bettina von Arnim Achim von Arnim Clemens Brentano Georg Büchner Adelbert von Chamisso Annette von Droste-Hülshoff Marie von Ebner-Eschenbach Joseph von Eichendorff Theodor Fontane Gustav Freytag Jeremias Gotthelf Franz Grillparzer Jacob Grimm Wilhelm Grimm Gerhart Hauptmann Christian Friedrich Hebbel Johann Peter Hebel Heinrich Heine Georg Herwegh Paul Heyse E. T. A. Hoffmann Friedrich Hölderlin Gottfried Keller Heinrich von Kleist Nikolaus Lenau Karl May Conrad Ferdinand Meyer Eduard Mörike Johann Nestroy Wilhelm Raabe Adalbert Stifter Theodor Storm Ludwig Tieck Ludwig Uhland 20th century Ilse Aichinger May Ayim Ingeborg Bachmann Hermann Bahr Vicki Baum Johannes R. Becher Gottfried Benn Thomas Bernhard Hugo Bettauer Heinrich Böll Thomas Brasch Volker Braun Bertolt Brecht Rolf Dieter Brinkmann Hermann Broch Arnolt Bronnen Hermann Burger Elias Canetti Paul Celan Alfred Döblin Heimito von Doderer Friedrich Dürrenmatt Lion Feuchtwanger Marieluise Fleißer Erich Fried Max Frisch Stefan George Günter Grass Peter Handke Marlen Haushofer Hermann Hesse Georg Heym Wolfgang Hilbig Hugo von Hofmannsthal Ödön von Horváth Ricarda Huch Peter Huchel Ernst Jandl Uwe Johnson Ernst Jünger Franz Kafka Marie Luise Kaschnitz Erich Kästner Bernhard Kellermann Hermann Kesten Irmgard Keun Sarah Kirsch Egon Erwin Kisch Siegfried Kracauer Karl Kraus Else Lasker-Schüler Kurd Laßwitz Gert Ledig Siegfried Lenz Heinrich Mann Klaus Mann Thomas Mann Friederike Mayröcker Christian Morgenstern Erich Mühsam Heiner Müller Adolf Muschg Robert Musil Erich Maria Remarque Rainer Maria Rilke Joseph Roth Nelly Sachs Ernst von Salomon Paul Scheerbart Arthur Schnitzler Helga Schubert Kurt Schwitters W. G. Sebald Anna Seghers Bertha von Suttner Ernst Toller Georg Trakl Kurt Tucholsky Robert Walser Josef Weinheber Peter Weiss Franz Werfel Christa Wolf Stefan Zweig Contemporary writers Zsuzsa Bánk Thomas Brussig Dietmar Dath Jenny Erpenbeck Rainald Goetz Durs Grünbein Peter Handke Judith Hermann Elfriede Jelinek Reinhard Jirgl Wladimir Kaminer Daniel Kehlmann Esther Kinsky Alexander Kluge Barbara Köhler Christian Kracht Monika Maron Clemens Meyer Terézia Mora Herta Müller Sharon Dodua Otoo Emine Sevgi Özdamar Teresa Präauer Julya Rabinowich Rafik Schami Ingo Schulze Lutz Seiler Clemens J. Setz Botho Strauss Yoko Tawada Uwe Timm Ilija Trojanow Jan Wagner Martin Walser Peter Wawerzinek Wolf Wondratschek Feridun Zaimoğlu Juli Zeh German-language Nobel laureates Theodor Mommsen Rudolf Christoph Eucken Paul Heyse Gerhart Hauptmann Carl Spitteler Thomas Mann Hermann Hesse Nelly Sachs Heinrich Böll Elias Canetti Günter Grass Elfriede Jelinek Herta Müller Peter Handke German-language literary awards Ingeborg Bachmann Prize Georg Büchner Prize Sigmund Freud Prize Adelbert von Chamisso Prize Hans Fallada Prize Goethe Prize Heinrich Heine Prize Kleist Prize Leipzig Book Fair Prize Nelly Sachs Prize Kurd Laßwitz Award Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic 2 Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐9kkfp
Cached time: 20250815000135
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.732 seconds
Real time usage: 0.991 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1898/1000000
Revision size: 23031/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 149004/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1830/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 61552/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.316/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13634499/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  525.959      1 -total
 20.95%  110.200      7 Template:Lang
 20.39%  107.255      5 Template:Navbox
 20.37%  107.164      1 Template:Reflist
 18.93%   99.564      1 Template:Westernart
 17.48%   91.931      1 Template:Cite_web
 12.91%   67.917      1 Template:Short_description
  7.21%   37.907      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.71%   35.316      1 Template:Authority_control
  4.20%   22.077      1 Template:For Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:863995:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815000135 and revision id 1295215346. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=New_Objectivity&oldid=1295215346 " Categories : German art movements Modern art Modernism (music) 20th-century German literature Weimar culture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 12 June 2025, at 11:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents New Objectivity 37 languages Add topic

