Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Hanneman's portraits 3 Paintings by Hanneman in public museums 4 References 5 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Adriaen Hanneman 14 languages العربية Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Italiano مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Русский Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dutch Golden Age painter (c. 1603–1671) Adriaen Hanneman Self-portrait 1656.

Born Adriaen Hanneman 1603 The Hague Died 1671 (aged 67–68) The Hague Nationality Dutch Known for Painting Movement Baroque Adriaen Hanneman (c. 1603 – buried 11 July 1671) was a Dutch Golden Age painter best known for his portraits of the exiled British royal court. His style was strongly influenced by his contemporary, Anthony van Dyck .

Biography [ edit ] He was born into a wealthy Catholic patrician family in The Hague , and studied drawing with Hague portrait artist Jan Antonisz. van Ravesteyn .

[ 1 ] He left for England in 1623 where he lived for 16 years.

[ 2 ] There he met and was influenced by Anthony van Dyck , Cornelis Janssens van Ceulen , and Daniel Mytens . He enjoyed the patronage of Constantijn Huygens , who introduced him at court. He returned to The Hague, where he married the daughter of his old drawing teacher, Maria van Ravesteyn, in 1640. In 1645 he became deacon of the Guild of St. Luke . In 1656 he was one of the dissenters who split off into the Confrerie Pictura , which he headed the first period. In 1666 he was awarded a silver goblet for his years of service to this group. After his first wife died, he married a second time to Alida Bezemer in 1669. His pupils were Jeremias van der Eyden, Reinier de la Haye , Marcus van der Linde, Gijsbert van Lybergen, Simon du Parcq, Bernardus van der Vechte, Jan Jansz. Westerbaen (II), and Cornelis Wildt.

[ 3 ] He influenced the painter Govert Flinck .

[ 3 ] Like so many other Catholic painters, he fell on hard times soon after this as the Rampjaar approached. Records show him selling possessions again and again in 1670, and the next year he died in The Hague, leaving all of his drawings and engravings to his student Simon du Parcq. Though he had been a highly respected and successful man, his entire estate only brought 1,000 guilders.

[ 1 ] Hanneman's portraits [ edit ] Hanneman is best known for court portraits of the British and Dutch nobility, usually painted in imitation of the style of Anthony van Dyck.  According to some sources, he may have worked in the studio of Van Dyke in London.  Later, in the Hague, he painted several English Royalists who had gone into exile in the Netherlands after the English Civil War .

Cornelis van Aerssen van Sommelsdijck , Rijksmuseum Amsterdam Family of Constantijn Huygens Johan de Witt Wendela Bicker (1635–1668), wife of Johan de Witt , 1659 William Hamilton , Second Duke Hamilton , National Portrait Gallery , London Henry, Duke of Gloucester , National Gallery of Art , Washington William III when Prince of Orange In about 1639, soon after returning from England, he painted a portrait of the Dutch scientist Christiaan Huygens (1629–1695), a contemporary of Isaac Newton , who discovered the wave theory of light, Saturn's rings and the pendulum clock.

In about 1648, he painted Charles, the Prince of Wales, later Charles II of England , when he was in The Hague staying with his sister. The original painting is lost, but about thirty copies were made, and are found in different museums, including the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford.

In about 1654, he painted the four-year-old William III , Prince of Orange, wearing the sash of the Order of the Garter . (now in the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam.) In about 1664 he painted Maria I Stuart (1631–1660), the wife of Prince William II .  The painting (now in the Mauritshuis in the Netherlands) was made several years after her death, at the request of her son, Willem III. Mary is painted wearing a South American cloak of colored feathers, and a headdress of pearls and ostrich feathers. Such cloaks had been brought to the Netherlands from Brazil as early as 1644.

Paintings by Hanneman in public museums [ edit ] Portrait of a Gentleman (circa 1655), Museu Nacional d'Art de Catalunya Portrait of a Woman , Metropolitan Museum of Art , New York.

Portrait of a Woman ,  (1653), Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts, Moscow Henry, Duke of Gloucester (c. 1653), National Gallery of Art , Washington D.C.

Prince William III (1654), Rijksmuseum , Amsterdam.

Posthumous Portrait of Mary I Stuart with a Servant , Mauritshuis Museum.

Portrait of Lady Lucy Percy , Minneapolis Institute of Art .

William Hamilton, Second Duke of Hamilton , National Portrait Gallery , London.

Charles II as Prince of Wales (copies of lost original), Ashmolean Museum , Oxford and National Portrait Gallery, London.

Two Boys and a Bubble , The Norton Museum of Art in West Palm Beach Florida Mary Lucas (1636), National Gallery of Victoria , Melbourne, Victoria References [ edit ] ^ a b Dutch Who's who by Molhuisen on the DBNL ^ Molhuisen says this is mentioned in Walpole .

^ a b Adriaen Hanneman in the RKD Sources [ edit ] Wheelock, Jr., Arthur K. "Dutch Paintings of the Seventeenth Century - The Collections of the National Gallery of Art" Systematic Catalog . Washington DC, 1995, pgs. 91-92.

Cust, Lionel Henry (1891).

"Hanneman, Adriaen" . In Stephen, Leslie ; Lee, Sidney (eds.).

Dictionary of National Biography . Vol. 25. London: Smith, Elder & Co.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Adriaen Hanneman at Wikimedia Commons ‹ The template below ( Authority control (arts) ) is being considered for deletion. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. › Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Artists ULAN RKD Artists Victoria Städel People Netherlands 2 Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Adriaen_Hanneman&oldid=1303813743 " Categories : 1600s births 1671 deaths Dutch Golden Age painters Dutch male painters Painters from The Hague Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2019 Articles with hCards Articles incorporating Cite DNB template Commons link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 05:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Adriaen Hanneman 14 languages Add topic

