Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 General techniques 3 Bacterial and fungal culture Toggle Bacterial and fungal culture subsection 3.1 Inoculation 3.2 Incubation 3.3 Identification 4 Bacteria, culture-independent 5 References Toggle the table of contents Isolation (microbiology) 1 language فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Separation of a strain from a mixed population of microbes This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( January 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( January 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( May 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Isolation" microbiology – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In microbiology, the term isolation refers to the separation of a strain from a natural, mixed population of living microbes , [ 1 ] as present in the environment, for example in water or soil , or from living beings with skin flora , oral flora or gut flora , in order to identify the microbe(s) of interest.

[ 2 ] Historically, the laboratory techniques of isolation first developed in the field of bacteriology and parasitology (during the 19th century), before those in virology during the 20th century.

History [ edit ] The laboratory techniques of isolating microbes first developed during the 19th century in the field of bacteriology and parasitology using light microscopy . 1860 marked the successful introduction of liquid medium by Louis Pasteur . The liquid culture pasteur developed allowed for the visulization of promoting or inhibiting growth of specific bacteria. This same technique is utilized today through various mediums like Mannitol salt agar , a solid medium. Solid cultures were developed in 1881 when Robert Koch solidified the liquid media through the addition of agar [ 3 ] Proper isolation techniques of virology did not exist prior to the 20th century. The methods of microbial isolation have drastically changed over the past 50 years, from a labor perspective with increasing mechanization, and in regard to the technologies involved, and with it speed and accuracy.

General techniques [ edit ] Bacteria extracted from soil sample.

In order to isolate a microbe from a natural, mixed population of living microbes , as present in the environment, for example in water or soil flora , or from living beings with skin flora , oral flora or gut flora , one has to separate it from the mix.

Traditionally microbes have been cultured in order to identify the microbe(s) of interest based on its growth characteristics. 
Depending on the expected density and viability of microbes present in a liquid sample, physical methods to increase the gradient as for example serial dilution or centrifugation may be chosen.
In order to isolate organisms in materials with high microbial content, such as sewage, soil or stool, serial dilutions will increase the chance of separating a mixture.

In a liquid medium with few or no expected organisms, from an area that is normally sterile (such as CSF , blood inside the circulatory system) centrifugation, decanting the supernatant and using only the sediment will increase the chance to grow and isolate bacteria or the usually cell-associated viruses.

If one expects or looks for a particularly fastidious organism, the microbiological culture and isolation techniques will have to be geared towards that microbe. For example, a bacterium that dies when exposed to air, can only be isolated if the sample is carried and processed under airless or anaerobic conditions. A bacterium that dies when exposed to room temperature (thermophilic) requires a pre-warmed transport container, and a microbe that dries and dies when carried on a cotton swab will need a viral transport medium before it can be cultured successfully.

Bacterial and fungal culture [ edit ] Inoculation [ edit ] Laboratory technicians inoculate the sample onto certain solid agar plates with the streak plate method or into liquid culture medium , depending what the objective of the isolation is: If one wants to isolate only a particular group of bacteria, such as Group A Streptococcus from a throat swab, one can use a selective medium that will suppress the growth of concomitant bacteria expected in the mix (by antibiotics present in the agar), so that only Streptococci are "selected", i.e. visibly stand out.

[ 4 ] To isolate fungi, Sabouraud agar can be used. Alternatively, lethal conditions for streptococci and gram negative bacteria like high salt concentrations in Mannitol salt agar favor survival of any staphylococci present in a sample of gut bacteria, and phenol red in the agar acts as a ph indicator showing if the bacteria are able to ferment mannitol by excreting acid into the medium. In other agar substances are added to exploit an organism's ability to produce a visible pigment (e.g.

granada medium for Group B Streptococcus ) which changes the bacterial colony 's color, or to dissolve blood agar by hemolysis so that they can be more easily spotted. Some bacteria like Legionella species require particular nutrients or toxin binding as in charcoal to grow and therefore media such as Buffered charcoal yeast extract agar must be used.

If one wants to isolate as many or all strains possible, different nutrient media as well as enriched media, such as blood agar and chocolate agar and anaerobic culture media such as thioglycolate broth need to be inoculated. To enumerate the growth, bacteria can be suspended in molten agar before it becomes solid, and then poured into petri dishes , the so-called 'pour plate method' which is used in environmental microbiology and food microbiology (e.g. dairy testing) to establish the so-called 'aerobic plate count'.

Incubation [ edit ] After the sample is inoculated into or onto the choice media, they are incubated under the appropriate atmospheric settings, such as aerobic, anaerobic or microaerophilic conditions or with added carbon dioxide (5%), at different temperature settings, for example 37 °C in an incubator or in a refrigerator for cold enrichment, under appropriate light, for example strictly without light wrapped in paper or in a dark bottle for scotochromogen mycobacteria, and for different lengths of time, because different bacteria grow at a different speed, varying from hours ( Escherichia coli ) to weeks (e.g.

mycobacteria ).

At regular, serial intervals laboratory technicians and microbiologists inspect the media for signs of visible growth and record it. The inspection again has to occur under conditions favoring the isolate's survival, i.e. in an 'anaerobic chamber' for anaerobe bacteria for example, and under conditions that do not threaten the person looking at the plates from being infected by a particularly infectious microbe, i.e. under a biological safety cabinet for Yersinia pestis (plague) or Bacillus anthracis (anthrax) for example.

Identification [ edit ] When bacteria have visibly grown, they are often still mixed. The identification of a microbe depends upon the isolation of an individual colony , as biochemical testing of a microbe to determine its different physiological features depends on a pure culture .
To make a subculture , one again works in aseptic technique in microbiology , lifting a single colony off the agar surface with a loop and streaks the material into the 4 quadrants of an agar plate or all over if the colony was singular and did not look mixed.

Example of gram staining on a gram positive rod.

Gram staining allows for visualization of the bacteria's cell wall composition based on the color the bacteria stains after a series of staining and decolorization steps.

[ 5 ] This staining process allows for the identification of gram-negative and gram positive bacteria. Gram-negative bacteria will stain a pink color due to the thin layer of peptidoglycan. If a bacteria stains purple, due to the thick layer of peptidoglycan, the bacteria is a gram-positive bacteria.

[ 5 ] In clinical microbiology numerous other staining techniques for particular organisms are used (acid fast bacterial stain for mycobacteria). Immunological staining techniques, such as direct immunofluorescence have been developed for medically important pathogens that are slow growing ( Auramine-rhodamine stain for mycobacteria ) or difficult to grow (such as Legionella pneumophila species) and where the test result would alter standard management and empirical therapy .

Biochemical testing of bacteria involves a set of agars in vials to separate motile from non-motile bacteria .
In 1970 a miniaturized version was developed, called the analytical profile index .

Successful identification via e.g.

genome sequencing and genomics depends on pure cultures.

Bacteria, culture-independent [ edit ] While the most rapid method to identify bacteria is by sequencing their 16S rRNA gene, which has been PCR-amplified beforehand, this method does not require isolation. Since most bacteria cannot be grown with conventional methods (particularly environmental or soil bacteria) metagenomics or metatranscriptomics are used, shotgun sequencing or PCR directed sequencing of the genome .  Sequencing with mass spectrometry as in Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI-TOF MS) is used in the analysis of clinical specimens to look for pathogens.

Whole genome sequencing is an option for a singular organism that cannot be sufficiently characterized for identification. Small DNA microarrays can also be used for identification.

References [ edit ] ^ Baisas, Laura (Jul 7, 2025).

"A mosquito killer may lurk in a Mediterranean bacteria" .

Popular Science .

In microbiology, an isolate is a single species of bacteria that has been separated out from a mixed culture and also obtained from a pure culture. As a result, all of the bacteria in the culture are the same type. This makes it easier for biologists to study and identify that specific bacteria or bacterium ^ "Isolation and Cultivation of Microorganisms" .

Biology Discussion . 2016-06-02 . Retrieved 2023-04-21 .

^ Bonnet, M.; Lagier, J. C.; Raoult, D.; Khelaifia, S. (2020).

"Bacterial culture through selective and non-selective conditions: the evolution of culture media in clinical microbiology" .

New Microbes and New Infections .

34 100622.

doi : 10.1016/j.nmni.2019.100622 .

ISSN 2052-2975 .

PMC 6961714 .

PMID 31956419 .

^ Alfred Brown, Heidi Smith (2012).

Benson's Microbiological Applications: Laboratory Manual in General Microbiology (Thirteenth ed.). McGraw-Hill Education.

ISBN 9780073402413 .

^ a b "Gram Stain Protocols" .

ASM.org . Retrieved 2023-04-21 .

v t e Techniques in clinical microbiology Isolation and culture Isolation techniques Asepsis Streak plate Selective media Cultures by body site Blood culture Genital culture Sputum culture Throat culture Urine culture Wound culture Cultures by organism Bacterial culture Fungal culture Viral culture Identification and testing Manual testing: basic techniques Colonial morphology Hemolysis Staining Gram stain Acid-fast stain Giemsa stain India ink stain Ziehl–Neelsen stain Wet prep Rapid tests Oxidase Catalase Indole PYR Manual testing: biochemical and immunologic tests ALA test Amino acid decarboxylase test Bile solubility test CAMP test Citrate test Coagulase test DNAse test IMViC KOH test Methyl red test Nitrite test ONPG test Oxidative/fermentation glucose test Phenylalanine deaminase test Reverse CAMP test Salt tolerance test Sulfide indole motility test Triple sugar iron test Urease test rapid Voges–Proskauer test X and V factor test Bacitracin susceptibility test Optochin susceptibility test Novobiocin susceptibility test Lancefield grouping RPR test Automated and point-of-care testing Analytical profile index MALDI-TOF Polymerase chain reaction VITEK Rapid strep test Monospot test Antibiotic susceptibility testing Beta-lactamase test Disk diffusion test Etest McFarland standards Minimum inhibitory concentration Equipment Agar plate Growth medium Anaerobic jar Gas-pak Durham tube Biosafety cabinet Incubator Inoculation loop Inoculation needle Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Isolation_(microbiology)&oldid=1301355260 " Category : Microbiology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from January 2016 All articles with style issues Articles that may contain original research from January 2016 All articles that may contain original research Articles lacking in-text citations from May 2019 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles needing additional references from November 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 10:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Isolation (microbiology) 1 language Add topic

