Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Post-war years 3 Academic career 4 Contributions to literary theory 5 Influence and legacy 6 Wartime journalism and posthumous controversies 7 Works 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Works cited 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Paul de Man 24 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Қазақша Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Русский Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American literary theorist (1919–1983) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Paul de Man" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Paul de Man Born Paul Adolph Michel Deman ( 1919-12-06 ) December 6, 1919 Antwerp , Belgium Died December 21, 1983 (1983-12-21) (aged 64) New Haven, Connecticut , U.S.

Education Education Free University of Brussels Harvard University (Ph.D., 1960) Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental philosophy Deconstruction Notable ideas Criticism of authorial intentionalism Paul de Man ( / d ə ˈ m ɑː n / ; Dutch: [də mɑn] ; December 6, 1919 – December 21, 1983), born Paul Adolph Michel Deman , [ 1 ] was a Belgian-born American literary critic and literary theorist . He was known particularly for his importation of German and French philosophical approaches into Anglo-American literary studies and critical theory. Along with Jacques Derrida , he was part of an influential critical movement that went beyond traditional interpretation of literary texts to reflect on the epistemological difficulties inherent in any textual, literary, or critical activity.

[ 2 ] This approach aroused considerable opposition, which de Man attributed to "resistance" inherent in the difficult enterprise of literary interpretation itself.

[ 3 ] After his death, de Man became a subject of further controversy when his history of writing pro-Nazi and anti-Jewish propaganda for the wartime edition of Le Soir , a major Belgian newspaper during German occupation , came to light.

Early life and education [ edit ] Paul de Man was born to a family of artisans of nineteenth-century Belgium and by the time of his birth, his family was prominent among the new bourgeoisie in Antwerp .

[ 4 ] He was the son of Robert de Man, a manufacturer and Magdalena de Braey.

[ 5 ] His maternal great-grandfather was the noted Flemish poet Jan Van Beers , and the family spoke French at home. His uncle Henri de Man (Dutch: Hendrik) was a famous socialist theorist and politician, who became a Nazi- collaborator during World War II . He played an important part in the decisions made by De Man during the Nazi occupation of Belgium.

[ 6 ] Paul's father, Robert ("Bob") de Man, was a moderately successful businessman whose firm manufactured X-ray equipment. De Man's father and his mother, Madeleine, who were first cousins, married over the family's opposition. The marriage proved unhappy.

De Man's early life was difficult and shadowed by tragedy. His mother Madeleine's first pregnancy with her oldest son Hendrik ("Rik," b. 1915) coincided with the intense German bombings of World War I and strained her physical and mental health. The stillbirth of a daughter two years later pushed her into intermittent but lifelong suicidal depression . She was psychologically fragile and had to be watched. The family walked on eggshells and "Bob" de Man found solace with other women. In contrast to Rik, who was backward and a failure in school, Paul dealt with his difficult home life by becoming a brilliant student and accomplished athlete. He was enrolled in the Dutch-speaking cohort of boys admitted to the prestigious and highly competitive Royal Athenaeum of Antwerp. There, he followed his father's career path in choosing to study science and engineering, consistently receiving top marks in all subjects and graduating at the top of his class. He took no courses in literature or philosophy but developed a strong extracurricular interest in both as well as in religious mysticism. In 1936, his brother Rik de Man was killed at the age of 21 when his bicycle was struck by a train at a railroad crossing. The following year, it was Paul, then seventeen, who discovered the body of their mother, who had hanged herself a month before the anniversary of Rik's death.

[ 7 ] That fall Paul enrolled in the Free University of Brussels . He wrote for student magazines and continued to take courses in science and engineering. For stability he turned to his uncle Henri as a patron and surrogate emotional father, later on several occasions telling people Henri was his real father and his real father was his uncle. He fathered a son with Romanian -born Anaïde Baraghian, the wife of his good friend, Gilbert Jaeger. They lived in a ménage à trois until August 1942, when Baraghian left her husband. Paul married her in 1944, and the couple had two more sons together.

[ 8 ] De Man, Baraghian and Jaeger fled to the south of France near the Spanish border when the Nazis occupied Belgium in 1940.

[ 9 ] Henri, who by then was a self-avowed fascist, welcomed the Nazi invaders, whom he saw as essential for instituting his brand of socialism.

[ 10 ] [ needs update ] [ 11 ] For a year, Henri de Man was appointed as de facto puppet Prime Minister of Belgium under the Nazis. Some believed that he used his influence to secure his nephew a position as an occasional cultural critic for Le Soir , the influential Belgian French-language newspaper. After contributing an essay, "The Jews in Present-Day Literature", to Le Soir volé' s notorious anti-Semitic attack of March 4, 1941, de Man became its official book reviewer and a cultural critic. Later he contributed to the Flemish daily Het Vlaamsche Land ; both publications were vehemently anti-Semitic when under Nazi control. As a cultural critic, de Man would contribute hundreds of articles and reviews to these publications. His writings supported the Germanic ideology and the triumph of Germany in the war, while never referring directly to Hitler himself (althogh he did endorse "Hitlerism"). In spite of that he maintained friendships with individual Jews.

[ 12 ] Holding three different jobs, de Man became very highly paid, but he lost all three between November 1942 and April 1943, failures that resulted from a combination of losing a coup he had launched against one employer and his own incompetence as a businessman at another.

[ citation needed ] After this, de Man went into hiding; the Belgian Resistance had now begun assassinating prominent Belgian pro-Nazis. He had lost his protection in late 1942, when Henri, mistrusted by his collaborators on the right and himself marked for death as a traitor by the Belgian Resistance, went into exile.

De Man spent the rest of the war in seclusion reading American and French literature and philosophy and organizing a translation into Dutch of Moby Dick by Herman Melville , which he published in 1945. He would be interrogated by prosecutor Roger Vinçotte, [ 13 ] but not charged after the war. Henri de Man was tried and convicted in absentia for treason ; he died in Switzerland in 1953, after crashing his car into an oncoming train, an accident that was almost certainly a suicide.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ needs update ] Post-war years [ edit ] In 1948, de Man left Belgium and emigrated to New York City .

[ 14 ] He had fled as an exile to avoid what became two trials for criminal and financial misdeeds (thefts of money from investors in a publishing company he ran) for which he was convicted in absentia to five years of imprisonment and heavy fines.

[ 17 ] Baraghian sailed with their three young sons to Argentina , where her parents had recently immigrated. De Man found work stocking books at the Doubleday Bookstore at New York City's Grand Central Station . From there he wrote to his friend Georges Bataille , a French philosopher, and through him, he met Dwight Macdonald , a key figure on the New York intellectual and literary scene. At Macdonald's apartment, de Man met the celebrated novelist Mary McCarthy . McCarthy recommended de Man to her friend Artine Artinian , a professor of French at Bard College , as a temporary replacement while Artinian spent the academic year 1949–50 in France as a Fulbright fellow .

De Man was to teach Mr. Artinian's courses, advise Mr. Artinian's advisees, and move into Mr. Artinian's house. By December [1949], de Man had married one of the advisees, a French major named Patricia Kelley, and when the first Mrs. de Man turned up with their three young boys, Hendrik, Robert, and Marc, in the spring of 1950, Patricia de Man [sic] was pregnant.

[ 18 ] De Man persuaded the devastated Baraghian to accept a sum of money, agree to a divorce, and return to Argentina. She, however, surprised him when she left the eldest boy with him, while he surprised her when his first check proved worthless. The boy was raised by Kelley's parents while she took the younger ones back to Argentina with a promise of child support that de Man was never to honor.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ needs update ] A heavily fictionalized account of this period of de Man's life is the basis of Henri Thomas 's 1964 novel Le Parjure ( The Perjurer ).

[ 20 ] His life also provides the basis for Bernhard Schlink 's 2006 novel, translated as "Homecoming". De Man married Kelley a first time in June 1950, but did not tell her that he had not actually gotten a divorce and that the marriage was bigamous . They underwent a second marriage ceremony in August 1960, when his divorce from Baraghian was finalized, and later had a third ceremony in Ithaca.

[ 21 ] In addition to their son, Michael, born while the couple was at Bard College, they had a daughter, Patsy. The couple remained together until de Man's death, aged 64, in New Haven, Connecticut .

In 1991, Hendrik de Man, the eldest of Paul de Man's sons, told David Lehman that his "father sometimes reminds me of Felix Krull", the protagonist of Thomas Mann's novel The Confessions of Felix Krull, Confidence Man , "whose father filled magnificent bottles with inferior wine. The labels were handsome; there was gleaming silver foil as well as a round seal suspended from a gold cord. Unfortunately, the stuff inside was 'simply poison.'" [ 22 ] Academic career [ edit ] The de Mans moved to Boston, where Paul earned money teaching conversational French at Berlitz and did translations assisted by Patricia de Man; he also gave private French lessons to Harvard student Henry Kissinger , then running a small center and publication of his own.

[ 23 ] There, de Man met Harry Levin , the Harvard Professor of Comparative Literature, and "was invited to join an informal literary seminar that met at Levin's house (alongside, e.g., George Steiner and John Simon ). By the fall of 1952, he was officially admitted to graduate study in comparative literature." [ 24 ] In 1954 someone sent Harvard an anonymous letter denouncing de Man as a wartime collaborator and questioning his immigration status (a letter not surviving, and known only on the basis of de Man's response to it).

[ 25 ] According to Harvard faculty members, de Man offered a thorough and more than satisfactory account of his immigration status and the nature of his political activities.

[ 24 ] While he was writing his dissertation, de Man was awarded a prestigious appointment at the Harvard Society of Fellows .

[ 26 ] In 1960, because his thesis was unsatisfactory to his mentors on several counts, and especially its philosophical approach, they were prepared to dismiss him, but he moved immediately to an advanced position at Cornell University , where he was highly valued.

[ 27 ] He began his teaching career in the United States at Bard College where he taught French literature .

[ 5 ] He completed his Ph.D.

at Harvard University in 1960, then taught at Cornell University , Johns Hopkins University , and the University of Zurich .

[ 28 ] He joined the faculty in French and Comparative Literature at Yale University , where he was considered part of the Yale School of Deconstruction . At the time of his death from cancer, he was Sterling Professor of the Humanities and chairman of the Department of Comparative Literature at Yale. De Man oversaw the dissertations of Gayatri Spivak (at Cornell), Barbara Johnson (at Yale), [ not verified in body ] Samuel Weber (at Cornell), and many other noted scholars.

Peter Brooks , who was de Man's undergraduate student at Harvard, and later became his friend and colleague at Yale, wrote that rather than brand de Man as a confidence man, as his critics were inclined to do: One might consider this a story of remarkable survival and success following the chaos of war, occupation, postwar migration, and moments of financial desperation: without any degrees to his name, de Man had impressed, among others, Georges Bataille , Macdonald, McCarthy, and Levin, and entered the highest precincts of American academia. During the following decade, he contributed nine articles to the newly established New York Review : astute and incisive short essays on major European writers— Hölderlin , Gide , Camus , Sartre , Heidegger , as well as Borges —that display notable cultural range and critical poise.

[ 24 ] On the other hand, Brooks was writing as an apologist and a friend, "and [as Evelyn Barish] shows (and as others of us have pointed out and documented over the years), de Man was a cheat, a liar, a forger, a thief, a bigamist, a cad, a swindler, a moocher, not to mention an enthusiastic Nazi propagandist," as David Lehman put in his response to Brooks in The New York Review.

[ 29 ] In 1966, de Man attended a conference on structuralism held at Johns Hopkins University , where Jacques Derrida delivered his celebrated essay, " Structure, Sign, and Play in the Discourse of the Human Sciences "; de Man and Derrida soon became fast friends.

[ citation needed ] Both were to become identified with Deconstruction . De Man came to reflect the influence primarily of Heidegger and used deconstruction to study Romanticism , both English and German , as well as French literature, specifically the works of William Wordsworth , John Keats , Maurice Blanchot , Marcel Proust , Jean-Jacques Rousseau , Friedrich Nietzsche , Immanuel Kant , G .W. F. Hegel , Walter Benjamin , William Butler Yeats , Friedrich Hoelderlin , and Rainer Maria Rilke .

[ citation needed ] Following an appointment to a professorship in Zürich , de Man returned to the United States in the 1970s to teach at Yale University, where he served for the rest of his career. At the time of his death of cancer at age 64, he was a Sterling Professor and chairman of the department of comparative literature at Yale.

[ citation needed ] After his death, a researcher uncovered some two hundred previously unknown articles which de Man had written in his early twenties for Belgian collaborationist [ 30 ] [ page needed ] newspapers during World War II , some of them implicitly and two explicitly anti-Semitic . These, in combination with revelations about his domestic life and financial history, caused a scandal and provoked a reconsideration of his life and work.

[ 14 ] Contributions to literary theory [ edit ] Although de Man's work in the 1960s differs from his later deconstructive endeavors, considerable continuity can also be discerned. In his 1967 essay "Criticism and Crisis" (included as the first chapter of Blindness and Insight ), he argues that because literary works are understood to be fictions rather than factual accounts, they exemplify the break between a sign and its meaning : literature "means" nothing, but critics resist this insight: When modern critics think they are demystifying literature, they are in fact being demystified by it. But since this necessarily occurs in the form of a crisis, they are blind to what takes place within themselves. What they call anthropology, linguistics, psychoanalysis, is nothing but literature reappearing like the hydra's head in the very spot where it had been suppressed. The human mind will go through amazing feats to avoid facing 'the nothingness of human matters'.

[ 31 ] De Man would later observe that, due to this resistance to acknowledging that literature does not "mean", English departments had become "large organizations in the service of everything except their own subject matter" ("The Return to Philology"). He said that the study of literature had become the art of applying psychology , politics , history , philology , or other disciplines to the literary text, in an effort to make the text "mean" something.

Among the central threads running through de Man's work is his attempt to tease out the tension between rhetoric (which de Man uses as a term to mean figural language and trope ) and meaning, seeking moments in the text where linguistic forces "tie themselves into a knot which arrests the process of understanding." [ 32 ] De Man's earlier essays from the 1960s, collected in Blindness and Insight , [ 33 ] represent an attempt to seek these paradoxes in the texts of New Criticism and move beyond formalism . One of De Man's central topoi is of the blindness on which these critical readings are predicated, that the "insight seems instead to have been gained from a negative movement that animates the critic's thought, an unstated principle that leads his language away from its asserted stand...as if the very possibility of assertion had been put into question." [ 34 ] Here de Man tries to undercut the notion of the poetic work as a unified, atemporal icon , a self-possessed repository of meaning freed from the intentionalist and affective fallacies. In de Man's argument, formalist and New Critical valorization of the "organic" nature of poetry is ultimately self-defeating: the notion of the verbal icon is undermined by the irony and ambiguity inherent within it. Form ultimately acts as "both a creator and undoer of organic totalities", and "the final insight...annihilated the premises which led up to it." [ 35 ] Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e In Allegories of Reading , de Man further explores the tensions arising in figural language in Nietzsche, Rousseau, Rilke, and Proust.

[ 36 ] In these essays, he concentrates on crucial passages which have a metalinguistic function or metacritical implications, particularly those where figural language has a dependency on classical philosophical oppositions ( essence /accident, synchronic / diachronic , appearance/reality) which are so central to Western discourse . Many of the essays in this volume attempt to undercut figural totalization, the notion that one can control or dominate a discourse or phenomenon through metaphor . In de Man's discussion of Nietzsche's The Birth of Tragedy , for instance, he claims that "genetic" conceptions of history appearing in the text are undercut by the rhetorical strategies Nietzsche employs: "the deconstruction does not occur between statements, as in a logical refutation or a dialectic, but happens instead between, on the one hand, metalinguistic statements about the rhetorical nature of language and, on the other hand, a rhetorical praxis that puts these statements into question." [ 37 ] For de Man, an "allegory of reading" emerges when texts are subjected to such scrutiny and reveal this tension; a reading wherein the text reveals its own assumptions about language, and in so doing dictates a statement about undecidability , the difficulties inherent in totalization, their own readability, or the "limitations of textual authority." [ 38 ] De Man is also known for his readings of English and German Romantic and post-Romantic poetry and philosophy ( The Rhetoric of Romanticism ), and concise and deeply ironic essays. Specifically noteworthy is his critical dismantling of the Romantic ideology and the linguistic assumptions which underlie it. His arguments are outlined below. First, de Man seeks to deconstruct the privileged claims in Romanticism of symbol over allegory , and metaphor over metonymy . In his reading, because of the implication of self-identity and wholeness which is inherent in the Romantics' conception of metaphor, when this self-identity decomposes, so also does the means of overcoming the dualism between subject and object , which Romantic metaphor sought to transcend. In de Man's reading, to compensate for this inability, Romanticism constantly relies on allegory to attain the wholeness established by the totality of the symbol.

[ 39 ] In addition, in his essay " The Resistance to Theory ", which explores the task and philosophical bases of literary theory , de Man uses the example of the classical trivium of grammar, rhetoric, and logic to argue that the use of linguistic sciences in literary theory and criticism (i.e. a structuralist approach) was able to harmonize the logical and grammatical dimension of literature, but only at the expense of effacing the rhetorical elements of texts which presented the greatest interpretive demands. He posits that the resistance to theory is the resistance to reading, thus the resistance to theory is theory itself. Or the resistance to theory is what constitutes the possibility and existence of theory. Taking up the example of the title of Keats's poem The Fall of Hyperion , de Man draws out an irreducible interpretive undecidability which bears strong affinities to the same term in Derrida's work and some similarity to the notion of incommensurability as developed by Jean-François Lyotard in The Postmodern Condition and The Differend . De Man argues that the recurring motive of theoretical readings is to subsume these decisions under theoretical, futile generalizations, which are displaced in turn by harsh polemics about theory.

Influence and legacy [ edit ] De Man's influence on literary criticism was considerable, in part through his numerous and vocal disciples. Although much of his work brought to bear insights on literature drawn from German philosophers such as Kant and Heidegger, de Man also closely followed developments in contemporary French literature, criticism, and theory.

Much of de Man's work was collected or published posthumously, for instance in his book Resistance to Theory which he complete shortly before his death, and a collection of essays, edited by his former Yale colleague Andrzej Warminski, was published by the University of Minnesota Press in 1996 under the title Aesthetic Ideology .

Wartime journalism and posthumous controversies [ edit ] This article contains too many or overly lengthy quotations .

Please help summarise the quotations . Consider transferring direct quotations to Wikiquote or excerpts to Wikisource .

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In August 1987, Ortwin de Graef, a Belgian graduate student at the University of Leuven , discovered some two hundred articles, including anti-semitic pieces, which de Man had written during World War II for Le Soir , a Nazi-controlled newspaper.

[ 14 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] In 1988, a conference on Paul de Man took place at the University of Antwerp . "On the last day, Jean Stengers , a historian at the Free University of Brussels, addressed a topic pointedly titled: "Paul de Man, a Collaborator?" [ 14 ] Then Georges Goriely, professor emeritus of sociology at the Free University of Brussels, rose to deliver what he called "A Personal Testimony": M. Goriely began by extolling de Man, whom he had known intimately in his youth, as "a charming, humorous, modest, highly cultured" homme de lettres renowned in Belgian literary circles during their youth. Then the professor dropped his bombshell. De Man, he asserted, wasn't all that he appeared to be. He was "completely, almost pathologically, dishonest," a crook who had bankrupted his family. "Swindling, forging, lying were, at least at the time, second nature to him." [ 14 ] The European press was in an uproar: "There were stories in La Quinzaine Litteraire , the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung , The (Manchester) Guardian .

Newsweek juxtaposed a photograph of de Man with another of Nazis on the march.

Le Soir described him as 'an academic Waldheim ." [ 14 ] De Man's disciples tried to portray the attacks on de Man as a cover for his critics' dislike of deconstruction, alleging that the attacks were a ruse that used de Man's youthful errors as evidence of what they considered the decadence at the heart of the Continental thought behind de Man and his theories. The controversies quickly spread from the pages of scholarly journals [ 43 ] to the broader media.

The Chronicle of Higher Education and the front page of The New York Times Book Review exposed the sensational details of de Man's personal life, particularly the circumstances of his marriage and his difficult relationships with his children.

[ 44 ] In the most controversial and explicitly anti-semitic essay from this wartime journalism, titled "Jews in Contemporary Literature" (1941), de Man described how "[v]ulgar anti-semitism willingly takes pleasure in considering post-war cultural phenomenon (after the war of 14–18) as degenerate and decadent because they are [enjewished]." [ 45 ] He notes that Literature does not escape this lapidary judgement: it is sufficient to discover a few Jewish writers under Latinized pseudonyms for all contemporary production to be considered polluted and evil. This conception entails rather dangerous consequences ... it would be a rather unflattering appreciation of western writers to reduce them to being mere imitators of a Jewish culture which is foreign to them.

[ 45 ] The article claimed that contemporary literature had not broken from tradition as a result of the First World War and that the Jews cannot claim to have been its creators, nor even to have exercised a preponderant influence over its development. On any closer examination, this influence appears to have extraordinarily little importance since one might have expected that, given the specific characteristics of the Jewish Spirit, the later would have played a more brilliant role in this artistic production.

[ 45 ] The article concluded that "our civilization...[b]y keeping, in spite of Semitic interference in all aspects of European life, an intact originality and character...has shown that its basic character is healthy." It concluded that "the creation of a Jewish colony isolated from Europe" as "a solution to the Jewish problem " would not entail any "deplorable consequences" for "the literary life of the west." [ 46 ] This is the only known article in which de Man pronounced such views so openly, though two or three other articles also accept without demurral the disenfranchisement and ostracization of Jews, as some contributors to Responses have noted.

De Man's colleagues, students, and contemporaries tried to respond to his early writings and his subsequent silence about them in the volume Responses: On Paul de Man's Wartime Journalism [ 47 ] (edited by Werner Hamacher, Neil Hertz, and Thomas Keenan; Nebraska, 1989). His longtime friend, Jacques Derrida, who was Jewish, published a lengthy piece responding to de Man's critics, equated criticiasm of de Man with "burning his books" (figuratively speaking) and therefore "reproduce[d] the exterminating gesture which one accuses de Man of not having armed himself against sooner with the necessary vigilance." [ 48 ] Derrida's essay, longer than that of the combined essays of de Man's critics in the issue in question of "Critical Inquiry," was notable for its overheated rhetoric. "An army has been mobilized against an article," he wrote. His critics were guilty of "murderous caricatures, abusive simplification, unjustified acts of violence." [ 49 ] Some readers objected to what they considered as Derrida's effort to liken criticism of de Man to the greater tragedy of extermination of the Jews.

[ 50 ] In Signs of the Times: Deconstruction and the Fall of Paul de Man (1991), David Lehman maintained that Derrida's defense of de Man's pro-Nazi writings constituted a species of special pleading. In accusing his critics of misrepresenting his intentions, Derrida conveniently disregarded some of his own tenets, such as the notion of the "death of the author," which carries with it the implication that the author's intent was irrelevant to the meanng of a text. Was there, Lehman asked, a worrisome connection between de Man's carefully hideen past and his brand of critical theory, which included the contention that confession may always be a rhetorical trick, a way to arouse sympathy for the confessor?

[ 51 ] .

Lehman summed up the case in an article titled "The (d) Man Who Out the Con in Deonstruction," which he wrote for The Los Angeels Times Book Review in March 1988.

[ 52 ] From the moment the scandal broke, some of de Man's followers have pointed out that de Man did not display personal animus against Jews. Shoshana Felman recounted that "about a year after the journalistic publication of his compromising statement, he and his wife sheltered for several days in their apartment the Jewish pianist Esther Sluszny and her husband, who were then illegal citizens in hiding from the Nazis." [ 53 ] Other former disciples, such as Alice Kaplan of the Yale faculty, responded to the de Man affair with a strenuous reconsideration of deconstruction. According to Kaplan, in her book French Lessons (1993), deconstruction sprang from the idea that there is "something inherently deceitful about language." De Man's deconstruction was also famously in favor of an impersonal ideal; it was "about keeping person-ness away." These ideas could be construed as self-serving in the light of de Man's failure to own up to his collaborationist writings of 1940, 1941, and 1942, when the Nazis occupied Belgium and persuaded de Man that the Third Reich was Europe's destiny. Kaplan left unanswered a key question: what part did Man's quisling wartime behavior play in the making of "the cool ironic theorist of language from whom we had tried to learn"? Bu Kaplan had learned a major lesson. As a teacher of doctoral candidates, " I don't want to fail them the way de Man failed me." [ 54 ] De Man's critics point out that throughout his life de Man was not only passively silent, but also engaged in an active coverup through lies and misdirections about his past. The question of de Man's personal history has continued to fascinate scholars, as evidenced by Evelyn Barish's 2014 biography The Double Life of Paul de Man .

[ 55 ] In an advance review published in Harper's Magazine , Christine Smallwood concludes that de Man, as portrayed by Barish, was "a slippery Mr.

Ripley , a confidence man, and a hustler who embezzled, lied, forged, and arreared his way to intellectual acclaim." [ 21 ] In response to these claims, Peter Brooks , who succeeded to de Man's post as Sterling Professor at Yale, stated that some of Barish's accusations were overblown, identifying several errors in her footnotes: "One could do a review of Barish's footnotes that would cast many doubts on her scholarship".

[ 24 ] For example, he cites the footnote Barish provides to support her claim that in 1942 de Man planned to launch a Nazi literary magazine: "I shared this information, and it has since been previously published in Belgian sources not now available to me", noting that this sort of thing "does not pass any sort of muster." Brooks quipped that “one could do a review of Barish’s footnotes,” to which David Lehman replied, "Yes, that is the deconstructive way: ignore the body of the text in favor of a peripheral element." In his biography, Barish characterized de Man as “one of the lukewarm, whom Dante condemned to sit eternally at the gates of Hell, men without principles or convictions who compromised with evil.” Brooks’s conclusion: “It would seem a general principle of the biographical art that one should avoid assigning positions in Hell to one’s subjects.” Lehman wrote: To this typically haughty ex cathedra pronouncement I would respond: it would seem a general principle of the book reviewer’s craft to summarize accurately the contents of the book under review and not to use the occasion as the pretext for an apologia. Those of us who lost family in the Holocaust have the right to insist that actions freely undertaken have consequences; that unquestioned brilliance of intellect does not justify misdeeds of the magnitude of de Man’s; and that special pleading in the face of overwhelming evidence is a species of dishonesty. No one forced de Man to write anti-Semitic and pro-Nazi articles—he did it on his own, and whether out of conviction or opportunism is beside the point.

[ 56 ] The de Man affair, his (posthumous) loss of grace, his lies of omission and commission, may have served as a point of departure for two novels. "Doctor Criminale" (Viking, 1992) by Malcolm Bradbury (who reviewed Lehman's "Signs of the Times" for the "New York Times" in February 1991), and "Shroud"  by John Banville (Knopf, 2002).

Works [ edit ] Blindness and Insight: Essays in the Rhetoric of Contemporary Criticism . 1971.

Allegories of Reading: Figural Language in Rousseau, Nietzsche, Rilke, and Proust ( ISBN 0-300-02845-8 ), 1979.

Blindness and Insight: Essays in the Rhetoric of Contemporary Criticism . 2nd ed. ( ISBN 0-8166-1135-1 ), 1983.

The Rhetoric of Romanticism ( ISBN 0-231-05527-7 ), 1984.

The Resistance to Theory ( ISBN 0-8166-1294-3 ), 1986.

Wartime Journalism, 1934–1943 Werner Hamacher, Neil Hertz, Thomas Keenan, editors ( ISBN 0-8032-1684-X ), 1988.

Critical Writings: 1953–1978 Lindsay Waters, editor ( ISBN 0-8166-1695-7 ), 1989.

Romanticism and Contemporary Criticism: The Gauss Seminar and Other Papers E. S. Burt, Kevin Newmark, and Andrzej Warminski, editors ( ISBN 0-8166-1695-7 ), 1993.

Aesthetic Ideology Andrzej Warminski, editor ( ISBN 0-8166-2204-3 ), 1996 The Post-Romantic Predicament , Martin McQuillan , editor ( ISBN 978-0-74864-105-5 ), 2012 [de Man's dissertation, collected with other writings from his Harvard University years, 1956–1961].

The Paul de Man Notebooks , Martin McQuillan, editor ( ISBN 978-0-74864-104-8 ), 2014.

See also [ edit ] List of deconstructionists References [ edit ] ^ Barish 2014 , p. 3.

^ Stranger Than Fiction The Atavist Magazine. 2020.

^ de Man, Paul (1982).

The Resistance to Theory . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. pp.

3– 20.

^ Barish 2014 , p. 4.

^ a b Spikes, Michael Paul (2003).

Understanding Contemporary American Literary Theory, Revised Edition . University of South Carolina Press. p. 19.

ISBN 1-57003-498-2 .

^ McQuillian, Martin (2001).

Paul de Man . Oxon: Routledge. p. 100.

ISBN 978-1-134-60911-6 .

^ Barish 2014 , p. 45.

^ Steiner, Wendy (1997).

The Scandal of Pleasure: Art in an Age of Fundamentalism . University Of Chicago Press. p. 191.

^ Barish 2014 , pp. 99–103.

^ Tuttleton, James (April 1991).

"Quisling criticism: the case of Paul de Man: a review of David Lehman, 'Signs of the Times: Deconstruction & the Fall of Paul de Man' " .

New Criterion .

^ J. Gérard-Libois ; José Gotovitch (1980).

L'An 40. La Belgique occupée [ The year 40. Occupied Belgium ] (in French). Bruxelles: Centre de recherche et d’information socio-politiques (CRISP).

^ Barish 2014 , e.g., his contacts with G. Goriély, p. 142 and E. Sluszny, pp. 153, 154 ^ Barish 2014 , p. 194.

^ a b c d e f g James Atlas (August 28, 1988).

"The Case of Paul de Man" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 3 May 2014 .

^ Peter Rudnytsky (1994). "Rousseau's Confessions, De Man's Excuses". In Mary Donaldson-Evans; Lucienne Frappier-Mazur; Gerald Prince (eds.).

Autobiography, Historiography, Rhetoric: A Festschrift in Honor of Frank Paul Bowman . Amsterdam: Rodopi. pp.

215– 243.

ISBN 978-9-05183-576-2 . Retrieved 2020-01-02 .

^ Kermode, Frank (March 16, 1989).

"Paul de Man's Abyss" .

London Review of Books .

11 (6).

^ Barish 2014 , p. 192.

^ a b Lehman, David (May 24, 1992).

"Paul de Man: The Plot Thickens" .

The New York Times .

^ "The Many Betrayals of Paul de Man" .

The Chronicle of Higher Education . 21 October 2013.

^ Lindsay Waters (1989). "Paul de Man: Life and Works".

Critical Writings: 1953–1978 . By Paul de Man. Lindsay Waters (ed.). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. p. lxiv.

See also Jacques Derrida (2002). "Le Parjure: Perhaps , Storytelling and Lying".

Without Alibi . Stanford University Press. pp.

161 –201.

^ a b Christine Smallwood (March 2014).

"New Books" .

Harper's Magazine . Vol. March 2014.

^ David Lehman, "Paul de Man: The Plot Thickens," The New York Times Book Review , May 24, 1992, p. 19.

^ Barish 2014 , pp. 326–327.

^ a b c d Peter Brooks (April 3, 2014).

"The Strange Case of Paul de Man" .

The New York Review of Books .

^ Barish 2014 , pp. 347–360.

^ Barish 2014 , p. 345.

^ Barish 2014 , pp. 423–425.

^ Barish 2014 , pp. xv, xx.

^ Lehman, New York Review of Books, May 8, 2014 ^ Barish 2014 , p. needed.

^ de Man, Paul. "Criticism and Crisis".

Blindness and Insight . p. 18.

[ full citation needed ] The phrase "nothingness of human matters" – le néant des choses humaines – is from a well-known passage about the imagination from Rousseau 's Julie ou La Nouvelle Héloïse (VI: VIII), which asserts that human happiness lies only in desire and not fulfillment: "The world of illusions is the only one worth inhabiting. Such is the vanity of human matters, outside the realm of the Self-Created Being, that nothing here is beautiful but what is not.

^ de Man, Paul, "Shelley Disfigured", in Bloom, Harold, et al.

Deconstruction and Criticism (New York, Continuum: 1979), p. 44.

^ de Man, Paul.

Blindness and Insight: Essays in the Rhetoric of Contemporary Criticism .

[ full citation needed ] ^ de Man, Paul. "The Rhetoric of Blindness".

Blindness and Insight . p. 103.

[ full citation needed ] ^ de Man, Paul. "The Rhetoric of Blindness".

Blindness and Insight . p. 104.

[ full citation needed ] ^ de Man 1979 .

^ de Man 1979 , p. 98.

^ de Man 1979 , p. 99.

^ de Man, Paul. "The Rhetoric of Temporality".

Blindness and Insight .

[ full citation needed ] ^ "Dead Yale Scholar Wrote For Nazi Paper" .

AP News . December 2, 1987 . Retrieved 2020-01-02 .

^ For facsimiles of the articles, see Paul de Man (1988). Werner Hamacher; Neil Hertz; Thomas Keenan (eds.).

Wartime Journalism 1939–1943 . Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

^ Menand, Louis (2014-03-17).

"The De Man Case" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X . Retrieved 2024-02-23 .

^ Derrida 1988 , pp. 597–598.

^ "Yale Scholar Wrote for Pro-Nazi Newspaper".

The New York Times . December 1, 1987. pp. B1, B6.

^ a b c Paul de Man. "The Jews in Contemporary Literature." Originally published in Le Soir (March 4, 1941), Martin McQuillan, translator, in Martin McQuillan, Paul de Man. USA (Routledge. 2001), pp. 127–29.

^ Paul de Man (March 4, 1941). "Les Juifs dans la littérature actuelle".

Le Soir (in French). p. 45.

^ Hamacher, Werner; Hertz, Neil; Keenan, Thomas (January 1989).

Responses: On Paul de Man's Wartime Journalism: Werner Hamacher, Neil H. Hertz, Thomas Keenan: 9780803272439: Amazon.com: Books . U of Nebraska Press.

ISBN 080327243X .

^ Derrida 1988 , p. 651; see also the "Critical Responses" in Critical Inquiry 15 (Summer 1989, 765–811) and Derrida's reply, "Biodegradables: Seven Diary Fragments", 812–873.

^ "Signs of the Times," pp. 256-57 ^ See, for example, Jon Wiener (Summer 1989). "The Responsibilities of Friendship: Jacques Derrida on Paul de Man's Collaboration".

Critical Inquiry .

15 (4): 797– 803.

doi : 10.1086/448520 .

S2CID 145367297 .

^ David Lehman, Signs of the Times: Deconstruction and the Fall of Paul de Man , N.Y.: Poseidon Press (Simon & Schuster), 1991 ^ Los Angeles Times Book Review, March 13, 1988.

^ Shoshana Felman, "Paul de Man's Silence", Critical Inquiry 15: 4 (Summer, 1989): 704–744 ^ David Lehman, "An Unsentimenal Education, Los Angeles Times Book Review , October 10, 1993.

^ Barish 2014 .

^ New York Review of Books, May 8, 2014 Works cited [ edit ] Barish, Evelyn (2014).

The Double Life of Paul de Man . New York: W. W. Norton/ Liveright .

ISBN 978-0-87140-326-1 .

de Man, Paul (1979).

Allegories of Reading: Figural Language in Rousseau, Nietzsche, Rilke, and Proust . New Haven: Yale University Press.

ISBN 0-300-02845-8 .

Derrida, Jacques (Spring 1988).

"Like the Sound of the Sea Deep within a Shell: Paul de Man's War" (PDF) .

Critical Inquiry .

14 (3). Translated by Kamuf, Peggy: 590– 652.

doi : 10.1086/448458 .

JSTOR 1343706 .

S2CID 161117345 . Retrieved 2020-01-02 .

Lehman, David (1991).

Signs of the Times: Deconstruction and the Fall of Paul de Man . New York: Simon & Schuster/Poseidon Press.

Further reading [ edit ] Bradbury, Malcolm (February 24, 1991).

"The Scholar Who Misread History" .

The New York Times .

[Review of D. Lehman's Signs of the times: Deconstruction and the Fall of Paul De Man ] Caruth, Cathy; Esch, Deborah, eds. (1995).

Critical Encounters: Reference and Responsibility in Deconstructive Writing . New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.

Cohen, Tom ; Cohen, Barbara; Miller, J. Hillis; Warminski, Andrzej, eds. (2000).

Material Events: Paul de Man and the Afterlife of Theory . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

[Essays on Aesthetic Ideology ] Colebrook, Claire ; de Man, Paul; Cohen, Tom; Miller, J. Hillis (2012).

Theory and the Disappearing Future: On de Man, On Benjamin . New York: Routledge.

[Includes de Man's notes for "Conclusions: on The Task of the Translator"] De Graef, Ortwin (1993).

Serenity in Crisis: A Preface to Paul de Man, 1939–1960 . Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

De Graef, Ortwin (1995).

Titanic Light: Paul de Man's Post-Romanticism . Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

Derrida, Jacques (1989).

Memoires for Paul de Man . New York: Columbia University Press.

Gasché, Rodolphe (1998).

The Wild Card of Reading . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Hertz, Neil; Hamacher, Werner; Keenan, Thomas, eds. (1988).

Responses to Paul de Man's Wartime Journalism . Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

Lehman, David (1991).

Signs of the Times: Deconstruction and the Fall of Paul de Man . New York: Simon & Schuster/Poseidon Press.

MacKenzie, Ian (2002).

Paradigms of Reading: Relevance Theory and Deconstruction . New York: Macmillan/Palgrave.

Norris, Christopher (1988).

Paul de Man: Deconstruction and the Critique of Aesthetic Ideology . London: Routledge.

Smallwood, Christine (March 2014). "New Books (The Double Life of Paul de Man)".

Harpers Magazine . pp.

77– 78.

Sosnoski, James J. (1995).

Modern Skeletons in Postmodern Closets: A Cultural Studies Alternative . Knowledge: Disciplinarity and Beyond. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press.

Waters, Lindsay; Godzich, Wlad (1989).

Reading de Man Reading . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Paul de Man .

Archival collections Guide to the Paul de Man Papers.

Special Collections and Archives, The UC Irvine Libraries, Irvine, California.

Guide to the Neil Hertz Papers on Paul de Man.

Special Collections and Archives, The UC Irvine Libraries, Irvine, California.

Other UCIspace at the Libraries digital collection: Paul de Man manuscripts, circa 1973–1983 Johns Hopkins Guide to Literary Theory Archived 2004-04-04 at the Wayback Machine v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e Continental philosophy Philosophers Adorno Agamben Althusser Arendt Aron Bachelard Badiou Barthes Bataille Baudrillard Bauman Benjamin de Beauvoir Bergson Blanchot Bourdieu Buber Butler Camus Cassirer Castoriadis Cioran Cixous Croce de Man Debord Deleuze Derrida Dilthey Eco Eagleton Engels Fanon Fichte Fisher Foucault Gadamer Gentile Guattari Gramsci Habermas Hegel Heidegger Husserl Ingarden Irigaray Jameson Jaspers Kierkegaard Kojève Koyré Kołakowski Kristeva Lacan Latour Lefebvre Lévi-Strauss Levinas Luhmann Lukács Lyotard Marcel Marcuse Marx Meillassoux Merleau-Ponty Nancy Negri Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rancière Ricœur Said Sartre Schelling Schmitt Schopenhauer Serres Sloterdijk Spengler Stein Strauss Weber Weil Williams Žižek Theories Absurdism Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Frankfurt School German idealism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Marxism Western Freudo- Neo-Kantianism Non-philosophy Non-representational theory Phenomenology Philosophical pessimism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Psychoanalysis Psychoanalytic theory Romanticism Speculative realism Structuralism Concepts Alterity Always already Angst Apollonian and Dionysian Authenticity Being in itself Binary oppositions Boredom Class struggle Critique Immanent Ideological Postcritique Dasein Death of God Death drive Différance Difference Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Gaze Genealogy Habitus Hauntology Historical materialism Ideology Interpellation (philosophy) Intersubjectivity Leap of faith Master–slave dialectic Master–slave morality Oedipus complex Ontic Ontopoetics Other Power Ressentiment Self-deception Totalitarianism Trace Transvaluation of values Wertkritik Will to power Hermeneutics of suspicion Discourse Linguistic theory Linguistic determinism Semantics Semiotics Media studies Film theory Linguistic turn Postcolonialism Philosophy of language Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐xnt49
Cached time: 20250818000948
Cache expiry: 85816
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.400 seconds
Real time usage: 1.612 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10260/1000000
Revision size: 50814/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 223546/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15752/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 210944/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.960/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23790849/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1395.990      1 -total
 19.54%  272.812      1 Template:Reflist
 15.92%  222.173     31 Template:Cite_book
 12.11%  169.062      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
  8.18%  114.215      1 Template:IPA
  7.53%  105.177      1 Template:Rhetoric
  7.38%  103.054      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.87%   95.940      2 Template:Ambox
  6.28%   87.736     11 Template:Fix
  5.49%   76.695     17 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:310123:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818000948 and revision id 1304478687. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paul_de_Man&oldid=1304478687 " Categories : 1919 births 1983 deaths 20th-century Belgian philosophers Post-structuralists Deconstruction Postmodernism Belgian literary critics Irony theorists Belgian Nazi propagandists Harvard University alumni Cornell University faculty Bard College faculty Johns Hopkins University faculty Yale University faculty American literary theorists Belgian literary theorists Rhetoric theorists Free University of Brussels (1834–1969) alumni Yale Sterling Professors Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1: long volume value All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from January 2020 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2014 All articles needing additional references Articles with hCards Pages with Dutch IPA Wikipedia articles in need of updating from May 2014 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2014 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2020 Wikipedia articles with style issues from January 2024 All articles with style issues Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 07:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paul de Man 24 languages Add topic

