Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure 2 History 3 Occurrence 4 Spectrum 5 Examples 6 Life cycle 7 References Toggle the table of contents Subdwarf O star 6 languages Français Македонски 日本語 Português Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subdwarf star with spectral type O "SdO" redirects here. For other, see SDO (disambiguation) .

Schematic cross-section of an O-type subdwarf.

A subdwarf O star (sdO) is a type of hot, but low-mass star. O-type subdwarfs are much dimmer than regular O-type main-sequence stars , but with a brightness about 10 to 100 times that of the Sun, [ 1 ] and have a mass approximately half that of the Sun. Their temperature ranges from 40,000 to 100,000 K. Ionized helium is prominent in their spectra. Their surface gravity (typically given as the gravity's logarithm), log g is usually between 4.0 and 6.5.

[ 2 ] Many sdO stars are moving at high velocity through the Milky Way and are found at high galactic latitudes .

[ 3 ] Structure [ edit ] The structure of a subdwarf O star is believed to be a carbon and oxygen core surrounded by a helium burning shell. The spectrum shows that the content is from 50 to 100% helium.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] In the early 1970s Greenstein and Sargent measured temperatures and gravity strengths and were able to plot their correct position on the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram . The Palomar-Green survey, Hamburg surveys, Sloan Digital Sky Survey and Supernova Ia Progenitor Survey (ESO-SPY) have documented many of these stars.

[ 4 ] Occurrence [ edit ] Subdwarf O stars are only a third as common as subdwarf B stars .

[ 4 ] Spectrum [ edit ] There is actually a variety of spectra from the sdO stars.  They can be grouped into those with strong helium lines, termed He-sdO, and those with stronger hydrogen lines, H strong sdO.  The He-sdO are fairly rare.

[ 4 ] Usually nitrogen is enriched and carbon depleted.  However, there are variations with enhancement in concentration of even numbered elements such as carbon, oxygen, neon, silicon, magnesium or iron.

[ 2 ] Examples [ edit ] Planetary nebula Abell 36 , the remains of a dead giant star leaving behind a subdwarf O star.

[ 5 ] HD 128220 was studied by Corrado Bartolini [ 2 ] HIP 52181 pulsates with a frequency of 1.04 milliHertz.

[ 2 ] HD 49798 is a carbon poor X-ray binary at 830pc.

[ 3 ] US 708 is a hypervelocity star that exceeds the escape velocity of the Milky Way.

[ 6 ] Life cycle [ edit ] They can be plotted on the Hertzsprung–Russell diagram . They are from two stages in the stellar lifecycle, post– asymptotic giant branch (the luminous sdO), and post– extended horizontal branch compact sdO. The post-AGB stars are expected to be found in planetary nebulas , but only four of the sdO stars are known to be like this. The compact sdOs would be descendants of the B-type subdwarfs . However, statistics do not match sdB. An alternate theory is that sdOs have been formed by coalescing two white dwarfs . This could happen from a close binary that decays due to gravitational waves .

[ 2 ] References [ edit ] ^ Napiwotski, Ralf.

"The Origin of Helium Rich Subdwarf O Stars" (PDF) . Retrieved 9 June 2011 .

^ a b c d e f Rey, Raquel Obeiro.

"Asterosismology of Hot Subdwarf Stars" (PDF) . Retrieved 9 June 2011 .

^ a b Viotti, R.; D. Cardini; A. Emanuele; M. Badiali.

"The Luminosity and Kinematics of a Sample of Hot Subdwarfs" (PDF) . pp.

395– 396 . Retrieved 9 June 2011 .

^ a b c Heber, Ulrich (September 2009).

"Hot Subdwarf Stars" (PDF) .

Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics .

47 (1): 211– 251.

Bibcode : 2009ARA&A..47..211H .

doi : 10.1146/annurev-astro-082708-101836 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 July 2011 . Retrieved 10 June 2011 .

^ "A Fleeting Moment in Time - European Southern Observatory's Cosmic Gems Programme captures last breath of a dying star" .

www.eso.org . Retrieved 22 January 2019 .

^ Heber, Uli; Hirsch, Heiko; Edelmann, Heinz; Napiwotzki, Ralf; O'Toole, Simon; Brown, Warren; Altmann, Martin (2008). "Hypervelocity Stars: Young and Heavy or Old and Light?".

Hot Subdwarf Stars and Related Objects .

392 : 167.

arXiv : 0805.1050 .

Bibcode : 2008ASPC..392..167H .

v t e Stars List Formation Accretion Molecular cloud Bok globule Young stellar object Protostar Pre-main-sequence Herbig Ae/Be T Tauri Herbig–Haro object Hayashi track Henyey track Evolution Main sequence Red-giant branch Horizontal branch Red clump Asymptotic giant branch post-AGB super-AGB Blue loop Planetary nebula Protoplanetary Wolf–Rayet nebula PG1159 Dredge-up OH/IR Instability strip Luminous blue variable Stellar population Supernova Superluminous Hypernova Classification Early Late Main sequence O B A F G K M Subdwarf O B WR OB Subgiant Giant Blue Red Yellow Bright giant Supergiant Blue Red Yellow Hypergiant Yellow Carbon S CN CH White dwarf Chemically peculiar Am Ap/Bp CEMP HgMn He-weak Barium Lambda Boötis Lead Technetium Be Shell B[e] Helium Extreme Blue straggler Remnants Compact star Parker's star White dwarf Helium planet Neutron Radio-quiet Pulsar Binary X-ray Magnetar Stellar black hole X-ray binary Burster SGR Hypothetical Blue dwarf Black dwarf Exotic Boson Electroweak Strange Preon Planck Dark Dark-energy Quark Q Black hole star Black Hawking Quasi-star Gravastar Thorne–Żytkow object Iron Blitzar White hole Nucleosynthesis Deuterium burning Lithium burning Proton–proton chain CNO cycle Helium flash Triple-alpha process Alpha process C burning Ne burning O burning Si burning s-process r-process p-process Nova Symbiotic Remnant Luminous red nova Recurrent Micronova Supernova Structure Core Convection zone Microturbulence Oscillations Radiation zone Atmosphere Photosphere Starspot Chromosphere Stellar corona Alfvén surface Stellar wind Bubble Bipolar outflow Accretion disk Protoplanetary disk Proplyd Asteroseismology Helioseismology Circumstellar dust Cosmic dust Circumstellar envelope Eddington luminosity Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism Properties Designation Dynamics Effective temperature Luminosity Kinematics Magnetic field Absolute magnitude Mass Metallicity Rotation Gravity darkening Starlight Variable Photometric system Color index Hertzsprung–Russell diagram Color–color diagram Strömgren sphere Kraft break Star systems Binary Contact Common envelope Eclipsing Symbiotic Multiple Cluster Open Globular Super Planetary system Earth-centric observations Sun Solar eclipse Solar radio emission Solar System Sunlight Pole star Circumpolar Constellation Asterism Magnitude Apparent Extinction Photographic Radial velocity Proper motion Parallax Photometric-standard Lists Proper names Arabic Chinese Extremes Most massive Highest temperature Lowest temperature Largest volume Smallest volume Brightest Historical brightest Most luminous Nearest bright Most distant With resolved images With multiple exoplanets Brown dwarfs Red dwarfs White dwarfs Milky Way novae Supernovae Candidates Remnants Planetary nebulae Timeline of stellar astronomy Related Substellar object Brown dwarf Desert Sub Planet Galactic year Galaxy Guest Gravity Intergalactic Neutron star merger Planet-hosting stars Stellar collision Stellar engulfment Tidal disruption event Category Stars portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Subdwarf_O_star&oldid=1301229341 " Category : O-type subdwarfs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 19:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Subdwarf O star 6 languages Add topic

