Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview and aspects Toggle Overview and aspects subsection 1.1 Economic system 1.1.1 Norway's particularities 1.2 Social democracy 1.3 Lutheran influence 1.4 Labour market policy 1.5 Nordic welfare model 1.5.1 Gender equality 1.5.2 Poverty reduction 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Denmark 2.2 Finland 2.3 Iceland 2.4 Norway 2.5 Sweden 3 Reception Toggle Reception subsection 3.1 Criticism 3.2 Misconceptions 4 See also Toggle See also subsection 4.1 Lists 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Nordic model 41 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Banjar Български Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Кыргызча Lombard Magyar Nederlands Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Social and economic model in Nordic countries This article is about the social and economic model in Northern Europe. For the political ideology often associated with the Nordic model, see Social democracy . For the type of prostitution law, see Nordic model approach to prostitution .

Flags of the Nordic countries , from left to right: Finland , Iceland , Norway , Sweden , and Denmark Part of a series on Nordic model Concepts Constitutional monarchy Deregulation Mixed economy Neo-corporatism Privatization Public services Private ownership Social corporatism Social democracy Tripartism State ownership Unitary republic Welfare capitalism History Saltsjöbaden Agreement Kanslergade Agreement Peasant republic By country Denmark economy politics Finland economy politics Iceland economy politics Norway economy politics Sweden economy politics Related articles Popular socialism (Nordic countries) Corporatism Capitalism Socialism Syncretic politics Economics portal Europe portal Politics portal v t e The Nordic model comprises the economic and social policies as well as typical cultural practices common in the Nordic countries ( Denmark , Finland , Iceland , Norway , and Sweden ).

[ 1 ] This includes a comprehensive welfare state and multi-level collective bargaining [ 2 ] based on the economic foundations of social corporatism , [ 3 ] [ 4 ] and a commitment to private ownership within a market-based mixed economy [ 5 ] – with Norway being a partial exception due to a large number of state-owned enterprises and state ownership in publicly listed firms .

[ 6 ] Although there are significant differences among the Nordic countries, [ 7 ] they all have some common traits. The three Scandinavian countries are constitutional monarchies , while Finland and Iceland have been republics since the 20th century. All the Nordic countries are however described as being highly democratic and all have a unicameral legislature and use proportional representation in their electoral systems . They all support a free market and universalist welfare state aimed specifically at enhancing individual autonomy and promoting social mobility , with a sizable percentage of the population employed by the public sector (roughly 30% of the work force in areas such as healthcare , education, and government), [ 8 ] [ 9 ] and a corporatist system with a high percentage of the workforce unionized and involving a tripartite arrangement , where representatives of labour and employers negotiate wages and labour market policy is mediated by the government.

[ 10 ] As of 2020, all of the Nordic countries rank highly on the inequality-adjusted HDI and the Global Peace Index as well as being ranked in the top 10 on the World Happiness Report .

[ 11 ] The Nordic model was originally developed in the 1930s under the leadership of social democrats , [ 12 ] although centrist and right-wing political parties, as well as labour unions, also contributed to the Nordic model's development.

[ 13 ] The Nordic model began to gain attention after World War II [ 14 ] and has transformed in some ways over the last few decades, including increased deregulation and expanding privatization of public services .

[ 15 ] [ 12 ] However, it is still distinguished from other models by the strong emphasis on public services and social investment.

[ 15 ] Overview and aspects [ edit ] The Nordic model has been characterized as follows: [ 16 ] An elaborate social safety net , in addition to public services such as free education and universal healthcare [ 16 ] in a largely tax-funded system.

[ 17 ] Strong property rights, contract enforcement and overall ease of doing business.

[ 18 ] Public pension plans.

[ 16 ] High levels of democracy as seen in the Freedom in the World survey and Democracy Index .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Free trade combined with collective risk sharing ( welfare social programmes and labour market institutions) which has provided a form of protection against the risks associated with economic openness.

[ 16 ] Little product market regulation.

Nordic countries rank very high in product market freedom according to OECD rankings.

[ 16 ] Low levels of corruption.

[ 19 ] [ 16 ] In Transparency International's 2022 Corruption Perceptions Index , Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden were ranked among the top 10 least corrupt of the 180 countries evaluated.

[ 21 ] A partnership between employers, trade unions and the government, whereby these social partners negotiate the terms to regulating the workplace amongst themselves, rather than the terms being imposed by law.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Sweden has decentralised wage co-ordination while Finland is ranked the least flexible.

[ 16 ] The changing economic conditions have given rise to fear among workers as well as resistance by trade unions in regards to reforms.

[ 16 ] High trade union density and collective bargaining coverage.

[ 24 ] In 2019, trade union density was 90.7% in Iceland, 67.0% in Denmark, 65.2% in Sweden, 58.8% in Finland, and 50.4% in Norway; in comparison, trade union density was 16.3% in Germany and 9.9% in the United States.

[ 25 ] Additionally, in 2018, collective bargaining coverage was 90% in Iceland, 88.8% in Finland (2017), 88% in Sweden, 82% in Denmark, and 69% in Norway; in comparison collective bargaining coverage was 54% in Germany and 11.7% in the United States.

[ 26 ] The lower union density in Norway is mainly explained by the absence of a Ghent system since 1938. In contrast, Denmark, Finland and Sweden all have union-run unemployment funds.

[ 27 ] Union density has declined in Denmark, Finland and Sweden, but is relatively stable, although at a lower level (about 50%), in the non-Ghent Norway.

[ 28 ] The Nordic countries received the highest ranking for protecting workers rights on the International Trade Union Confederation 2014 Global Rights Index, with Denmark being the only nation to receive a perfect score.

[ 29 ] Significant public spending , with Norway at 48.3% of GDP , Sweden at 49.4%, Iceland at 49.8%, Denmark at 50.8% and Finland at 55.8%. This is high even compared to the OECD average of 46.3%.

[ 30 ] Overall tax burdens as a percentage of GDP are high, with 35.9%, 41.4%, 41.4%, 42.4% and 43.4% for Iceland, Norway, Sweden, Finland and Denmark respectively. This is compared to the OECD average of 33.9%.

[ 31 ] The Nordic countries also have a relatively progressive taxation system in place; this along with their generous welfare systems have made them among the least unequal countries in the world.

[ 32 ] The United Nations World Happiness Reports show that the happiest nations are concentrated in Northern Europe. The Nordics ranked highest on the metrics of real GDP per capita, healthy life expectancy, having someone to count on, perceived freedom to make life choices, generosity and freedom from corruption.

[ 33 ] The Nordic countries place in the top 10 of the World Happiness Report 2018 , with Finland and Norway taking the top spots.

[ 34 ] Economic system [ edit ] Part of a series on Economic systems Major types Capitalism Socialism By ideology Associative Capitalist Corporate Democratic Laissez-faire Mercantilist Neo- Neoliberal Social market State Welfare Democratic Developmentalism Distributist Fascist Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgist Green Nationalist Protectionist Religious Buddhist economics Christian Sabbath economics Islamic Socialist Communist Market socialist Mutualist Participatory Socialist market Socialist-oriented market State Syndicalist Social credit Traditionalist Corporatist Feudalism By coordination Closed (autarky) Decentralized Digital Dirigist Dual Gift Informal Market Mixed Natural Open Planned Robinson Crusoe Sharing Subsistence Underground Vertical archipelago Virtual By regional model Asian East Asian Chinese Singaporean Keralan European Anglo-Saxon German Nordic Dutch Rhenish Soviet Latin America Socialism of the 21st century Sectors Common ownership Private Public Voluntary Property types Collective ownership Commons ( Common ownership ) Private property State ownership Social ownership Transition Collectivization Communization Corporatization Demutualization Deregulation Expropriation Financialization Liberalization Marketization Municipalization Mutualization Nationalization Privatization Socialization Marxist Coordination Barter Market Free Open Regulated Planning In kind Cybernetics Indicative Material balancing Price Self-managed Peer-to-peer Sharing Open access Other types Attention Commons-based peer production Expeditionary Hunter-gatherer Inclusive Democracy Information Manorialism Newly industrialized Palace Plantation Plutonomy Post-capitalist Post-industrial Post-scarcity Resource-based Token Traditional Transition World Business portal Economics portal v t e The Nordic model is underpinned by a mixed-market capitalist economic system that features high degrees of private ownership, [ 35 ] [ 36 ] with the exception of Norway which includes a large number of state-owned enterprises and state ownership in publicly listed firms.

[ 6 ] The Nordic model is described as a system of competitive capitalism combined with a large percentage of the population employed by the public sector , which amounts to roughly 30% of the work force, in areas such as healthcare and higher education . In Norway, Finland, and Sweden, many companies and industries are state-run or state-owned [ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] like utilities , mail , rail transport , airlines , electrical power industry , fossil fuels , chemical industry , steel mill , electronics industry , machine industry , aerospace manufacturer , shipbuilding , and the arms industry .

[ 41 ] In 2013, The Economist described its countries as "stout free-traders who resist the temptation to intervene even to protect iconic companies", while also looking for ways to temper capitalism's harsher effects and declared that the Nordic countries "are probably the best-governed in the world." [ 9 ] [ 42 ] Some economists have referred to the Nordic economic model as a form of "cuddly capitalism", with low levels of inequality, generous welfare states, and reduced concentration of top incomes, contrasting it with the more "cut-throat capitalism" of the United States, which has high levels of inequality and a larger concentration of top incomes, among other social inequalities.

[ 16 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] As a result of the Sweden financial crisis of 1990–1994 , Sweden implemented economic reforms that were focused on deregulation and the strengthening of competition laws . Despite this, Sweden still has the highest government spending-to-GDP ratio of all the Nordic countries, it retains national-level sectoral bargaining unlike Denmark and Iceland , with over 650 national-level bargaining agreements, [ 45 ] and it retains the Ghent system unlike Norway and Iceland and consequently has the second-highest rate of unionization in the world.

[ 46 ] [ 27 ] [ 47 ] Despite being one of the most equal OECD nations, from 1985 to the 2010s Sweden saw the largest growth in income inequality among OECD economies.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] Other effects of the 1990s reforms was the substantial growth of mutual fund savings, which largely began with the government subsidizing mutual fund savings through the so-called Allemansfonder program in the 1980s; [ 50 ] today 4 out of 5 people aged 18–74 have fund savings.

[ 51 ] Norway's particularities [ edit ] The state of Norway has ownership stakes in many of the country's largest publicly listed companies, owning 37% of the Oslo stock market [ 52 ] and operating the country's largest non-listed companies, including Equinor and Statkraft . In January 2013, The Economist reported that "after the second world war the government nationalised all German business interests in Norway and ended up owning 44% of Norsk Hydro's shares. The formula of controlling business through shares rather than regulation seemed to work well, so the government used it wherever possible. 'We invented the Chinese way of doing things before the Chinese', says Torger Reve of the Norwegian Business School." [ 52 ] The government also operates a sovereign wealth fund, the Government Pension Fund of Norway , whose partial objective is to prepare Norway for a post-oil future but "unusually among oil-producing nations, it is also a big advocate of human rights – and a powerful one, thanks to its control of the Nobel peace prize." [ 53 ] Norway is the only major economy in the north of Europe where younger generations are getting richer, with a 13% increase in disposable income income for 2018, bucking the trend seen in other european-northern nations of Millennials becoming poorer than the generations which came before.

[ 54 ] Social democracy [ edit ] Vote percentage over time of the main social democratic parties in Denmark, Finland, Sweden, and Norway: [ 55 ] Labour Party (Norway) Swedish Social Democratic Party Social Democrats (Denmark) Social Democratic Party of Finland Social democrats have played a pivotal role in shaping the Nordic model, with policies enacted by social democrats being pivotal in fostering the social cohesion in the Nordic countries.

[ 56 ] Among political scientists and sociologists, the term social democracy has become widespread to describe the Nordic model due to the influence of social democratic party governance in Sweden and Norway, in contrast to other classifications such as liberal or Christian democratic.

[ 57 ] According to sociologist Lane Kenworthy , the meaning of social democracy in this context refers to a variant of capitalism based on the predominance of private property and market allocation mechanisms alongside a set of policies for promoting economic security and opportunity within the framework of a capitalist economy as opposed to a political ideology that aims to replace capitalism.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] While many countries have been categorized as social democratic , the Nordic countries have been the only ones to be constantly categorized as such. In a review by Emanuele Ferragina and Martin Seeleib-Kaiser of works about the different models of welfare states, apart from Belgium and the Netherlands, categorized as "medium-high socialism", the Scandinavian countries analyzed (Denmark, Norway, and Sweden) were the only ones to be categorized by sociologist Gøsta Esping-Andersen as "high socialism", which is defined as socialist attributes and values (equality and universalism) and the social democratic model, which is characterized by "a high level of decommodification and a low degree of stratification. Social policies are perceived as 'politics against the market.'" They summarized the social democratic model as being based on "the principle of universalism, granting access to benefits and services based on citizenship. Such a welfare state is said to provide a relatively high degree of autonomy, limiting the reliance on family and market." [ 57 ] According to Johan Strang, since the 1990s, politicians, researchers and the media have shifted to explaining the Nordic model with cultural rather than political factors. These cultural explanations benefit neoliberalism , whose rise this cultural phenomenon coincided with. By the 2010s, politics has been re-entering the conversation on the Nordic model.

[ 12 ] Lutheran influence [ edit ] Some academics have theorized that Lutheranism , the dominant traditional religion of the Nordic countries, had an effect on the development of social democracy there. Schröder posits that Lutheranism promoted the idea of a nationwide community of believers and led to increased state involvement in economic and social life, allowing for nationwide welfare solidarity and economic co-ordination.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] Esa Mangeloja says that the revival movements helped to pave the way for the modern Finnish welfare state. During that process, the church lost some of its most important social responsibilities (health care, education, and social work) as these tasks were assumed by the secular Finnish state.

[ 63 ] Pauli Kettunen presents the Nordic model as the outcome of a sort of mythical "Lutheran peasant enlightenment", portraying the Nordic model as the result of a sort of "secularized Lutheranism"; [ 62 ] [ 64 ] however, mainstream academic discourse on the subject focuses on "historical specificity", with the centralized structure of the Lutheran church being but one aspect of the cultural values and state structures that led to the development of the welfare state in Scandinavia.

[ 65 ] Labour market policy [ edit ] The Nordic countries share active labour market policies as part of a social corporatist economic model intended to reduce conflict between labour and the interests of capital. This corporatist system is most extensive in Norway and Sweden, where employer federations and labour representatives bargain at the national level mediated by the government. Labour market interventions are aimed at providing job retraining and relocation.

[ 66 ] The Nordic labour market is flexible, with laws making it easy for employers to hire and shed workers or introduce labour-saving technology. To mitigate the negative effect on workers, the government labour market policies are designed to provide generous social welfare, job retraining and relocation services to limit any conflicts between capital and labour that might arise from this process.

[ 67 ] Nordic welfare model [ edit ] The Nordic welfare model refers to the welfare policies of the Nordic countries, which also tie into their labour market policies. The Nordic model of welfare is distinguished from other types of welfare states by its emphasis on maximising labour force participation, promoting gender equality , egalitarian , and extensive benefit levels, the large magnitude of income redistribution and liberal use of expansionary fiscal policy.

[ 68 ] While there are differences among the Nordic countries, they all share a broad commitment to social cohesion , a universal nature of welfare provision in order to safeguard individualism by providing protection for vulnerable individuals and groups in society, and maximising public participation in social decision-making. It is characterized by flexibility and openness to innovation in the provision of welfare. The Nordic welfare systems are mainly funded through taxation .

[ 69 ] Despite the common values, the Nordic countries take different approaches to the practical administration of the welfare state. Denmark features a high degree of private sector provision of public services and welfare, alongside an assimilation immigration policy. Iceland's welfare model is based on a "welfare-to-work" (see workfare ) model while part of Finland's welfare state includes the voluntary sector playing a significant role in providing care for the elderly. Norway relies most extensively on public provision of welfare.

[ 69 ] Gender equality [ edit ] When it comes to gender equality, the Nordic countries hold one of the smallest gaps in gender employment inequality of all OECD countries, [ 70 ] with less than 8 points in all Nordic countries according to International Labour Organization standards.

[ 71 ] They have been at the front of the implementation of policies that promote gender equality; the Scandinavian governments were some of the first to make it unlawful for companies to dismiss women on grounds of marriage or motherhood. Mothers in Nordic countries are more likely to be working mothers than in any other region and families enjoy pioneering legislation on parental leave policies that compensate parents for moving from work to home to care for their child, including fathers.

[ 72 ] Although the specifics of gender equality policies in regards to the work place vary from country to country, there is a widespread focus in Nordic countries to highlight "continuous full-time employment" for both men and women as well as single parents as they fully recognize that some of the most salient gender gaps arise from parenthood. Aside from receiving incentives to take shareable parental leave, Nordic families benefit from subsidized early childhood education and care and activities for out-of-school hours for those children that have enrolled in full-time education.

[ 70 ] The Nordic countries have been at the forefront of championing gender equality and this has been historically shown by substantial increases in women's employment. Between 1965 and 1990, Sweden's employment rate for women in working-age (15–64) went from 52.8% to 81.0%.

[ 71 ] In 2016, nearly three out of every four women in working-age in the Nordic countries were taking part in paid work. Nevertheless, women are still the main users of the shareable parental leave (fathers use less than 30% of their paid parental-leave-days), foreign women are being subjected to under-representation, [ 70 ] and Finland still holds a notable gender pay-gap; the average woman's salary is 83% of that of a man, not accounting for confounding factors such as career choice.

[ 73 ] Poverty reduction [ edit ] The Nordic model has been successful at significantly reducing poverty.

[ 74 ] In 2011, poverty rates before taking into account the effects of taxes and transfers stood at 24.7% in Denmark, 31.9% in Finland, 21.6% in Iceland, 25.6% in Norway, and 26.5% in Sweden. After accounting for taxes and transfers, the poverty rates for the same year became 6%, 7.5%, 5.7%, 7.7% and 9.7% respectively, for an average reduction of 18.7 p.p.

[ 75 ] Compared to the United States, which has a poverty level pre-tax of 28.3% and post-tax of 17.4% for a reduction of 10.9 p.p., the effects of tax and transfers on poverty in all the Nordic countries are substantially bigger.

[ 75 ] In comparison to France (27 p.p. reduction) and Germany (24.2 p.p. reduction), the taxes and transfers in the Nordic countries are smaller on average.

[ 75 ] History [ edit ] Part of a series on Scandinavia Countries Denmark Finland Iceland Norway Sweden History History by country Åland Denmark Faroe Islands Finland Greenland Iceland Norway Scotland Sweden Chronological history Prehistory Stone Age Bronze Age Iron Age Migration Period Viking Age Norsemen Christianization Kalmar Union Sweden Denmark–Norway Sweden–Norway Denmark–Iceland Nordic Council Geography Mountains Peninsula Baltic Sea North Sea Economy Nordic model Finland Sweden Related Languages Scandinavism Nordic countries Monetary Union Defence Union Scandinavian Airlines Denmark Faroe Islands Finland Iceland Norway Sweden v t e The term 'peasant republic' is sometimes applied to certain communities in Scandinavia during the Viking Age and High Middle Ages , especially in Sweden , where royal power seems to have been initially somewhat weak, [ 76 ] and in areas of modern day Sweden that were not under the rule of the Swedish king yet, as well as in Iceland where the Icelandic Commonwealth serves as an example of an unusually large and sophisticated peasant republic building on the same democratic traditions.

[ 77 ] Some historians have also argued that Gotland was a peasant republic before the attack by the Danes in 1361 .

[ 78 ] Central for the old Scandinavian democratic traditions was the assemblies called the Thing or Moot .

The Nordic model traces its foundation to the "grand compromise" between workers and employers spearheaded by farmer and worker parties in the 1930s. Following a long period of economic crisis and class struggle, the "grand compromise" served as the foundation for the post-World War II Nordic model of welfare and labour market organization. The key characteristics of the Nordic model were the centralized coordination of wage negotiation between employers and labour organizations , termed a social partnership, as well as providing a peaceful means to address class conflict between capital and labour.

[ 4 ] Magnus Bergli Rasmussen has challenged that farmers played an important role in ushering Nordic welfare states. A 2022 study by him found that farmers had strong incentives to resist welfare state expansion and farmer MPs consistently opposed generous welfare policies.

[ 79 ] Although often linked to social democratic governance, the Nordic model's parentage also stems from a mixture of mainly social democratic, centrist , and right-wing political parties, especially in Finland and Iceland, along with the social trust that emerged from the "great compromise" between capital and labour. The influence of each of these factors on each Nordic country varied as social democratic parties played a larger role in the formation of the Nordic model in Sweden and Norway, whereas in Iceland and Finland, right-wing political parties played a much more significant role in shaping their countries' social models. However, even in Iceland and Finland, strong labour unions contributed to the development of universal welfare.

[ 13 ] Social security and collective wage bargaining policies were rolled back following economic imbalances in the 1980s and the financial crises of the 1990s which led to more restrictive budgetary policies that were most pronounced in Sweden and Iceland. Nonetheless, welfare expenditure remained high in these countries, compared to the European average.

[ 80 ] Denmark [ edit ] Social welfare reforms emerged from the Kanslergade Agreement of 1933 as part of a compromise package to save the Danish economy.

[ 4 ] Denmark was the first Nordic country to join the European Union in the 1970s, reflecting the different political approaches to it among the Nordic countries.

[ 12 ] Finland [ edit ] The early 1990s recession affected the Nordic countries and caused a deep crisis in Finland, and came amid the context of the dissolution of the Soviet Union and collapse of trade from the Eastern Bloc . Like in Sweden, Finland's universalistic welfare state based on the Nordic model was weakened and no longer based on the social-democratic middle ground, as several social welfare policies were often permanently dismantled; however, Finland was hit even harder than Sweden. During the crisis, Finland looked to the European Union , which they were more committed and open to joining than Sweden and especially Norway, while Denmark had already joined the EU by the 1970s. Finland is, to date, the only Nordic country to become a Eurozone member state after fully adopting the euro as its official currency in 2002.

[ 12 ] [ 81 ] Iceland [ edit ] According to analyst Harpa Njálsdóttir, Iceland in the late 2010s moved away from the Nordic model towards the economic liberal model of workfare . She also noted that with the large changes having been made to the social security system, "70% of elderly people now live well below national subsistence criteria, while about 70% of those who live alone and in bad conditions are women." [ 82 ] Despite this, as of 2021, Iceland has the lowest poverty rate in the OECD of only 4.9%.

[ 83 ] Norway [ edit ] Norway's "grand compromise" emerged as a response to the crisis of the early 1930s between the trade union confederation and Norwegian Employers' Association , agreeing on national standards in labour–capital relations and creating the foundation for social harmony throughout the period of compromises. For a period between the 1980s and the 1990s, Norway underwent more neoliberal reforms and marketization than Sweden during the same time frame, while still holding to the traditional foundations of the "social democratic compromise" that was specific to Western capitalism from 1945 to 1973.

[ 84 ] Norway was the Nordic country least willing to join the European Union . While Finland and Sweden suffered greatly from the 1990s recession, Norway began to earn enough revenue from their oil.

[ 12 ] As of 2007, the Norwegian state maintained large ownership positions in key industrial sectors, among them petroleum, natural gas, minerals, lumber, seafood and fresh water. The petroleum industry accounts for around a quarter of the country's gross domestic product .

[ 85 ] Sweden [ edit ] In Sweden, the grand compromise was pushed forward by the Saltsjöbaden Agreement signed by employer and trade union associations at the seaside retreat of Saltsjöbaden in 1938. This agreement provided the foundation for Scandinavian industrial relations throughout Europe's Golden Age of Capitalism . The Swedish model of capitalism developed under the auspices of the Swedish Social Democratic Party which assumed power in 1932 and retained uninterrupted power until 1976. Initially differing very little from other industrialized capitalist countries, the state's role in providing comprehensive welfare and infrastructure expanded after the Second World War until reaching a broadly social democratic consensus in the 1950s which would become known as the social liberal paradigm, [ 4 ] which was followed by the neoliberal paradigm by the 1980s and 1990s.

[ 86 ] According to Phillip O'Hara, "Sweden eventually became part of the Great Capitalist Restoration of the 1980s and 1990s. In all the industrial democracies and beyond, this recent era has seen the retrenchment of the welfare state by reduced social spending in real terms, tax cuts, deregulation and privatization, and a weakening of the influence of organized labor." [ 87 ] In the 1950s, Olof Palme and the prime minister Tage Erlander formulated the basis of Swedish social democracy and what would become known as the "Swedish model", drawing inspiration from the reformist socialism of party founder Hjalmar Branting , who stated that socialism "would not be created by brutalized...slaves [but by] the best positioned workers, those who have gradually obtained a normal workday, protective legislation, minimum wages." Arguing against those to their left, the party favored moderatism and wanted to help workers in the here and now, and followed the Fabian argument that the policies were steps on the road to socialism, which would not come about through violent revolution but through the social corporative model of welfare capitalism , [ 88 ] to be seen as progressive in providing institutional legitimacy to the labour movement by recognizing the existence of the class conflict between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat as a class compromise within the context of existing class conflict.

[ 89 ] This Swedish model was characterized by a strong labour movement as well as inclusive publicly funded and often publicly administered welfare institutions.

[ 4 ] By the early 1980s, the Swedish model began to suffer from international imbalances, declining competitiveness and capital flight. Two polar opposite solutions emerged to restructure the Swedish economy, the first being a transition to socialism by socializing the ownership of industry and the second providing favorable conditions for the formation of private capital by embracing neoliberalism. The Swedish model was first challenged in 1976 by the Meidner Plan promoted by the Swedish Trade Union Confederation and trade unions which aimed at the gradual socialization of Swedish companies through wage earner funds. The Meidner Plan aimed to collectivize capital formation in two generations by having the wage earner funds own predominant stakes in Swedish corporations on behalf of workers. This proposal was supported by Palme and the Social Democratic party leadership, but it did not garner enough support upon Palme's assassination and was defeated by the conservatives in the 1991 Swedish general election .

[ 90 ] Upon returning to power in 1982, the Social Democratic party inherited a slowing economy resulting from the end of the post-war boom. The Social Democrats adopted monetarist and neoliberal policies, deregulating the banking industry, and liberalizing currency in the 1980s. The economic crisis of the 1990s saw greater austerity measures, deregulation, and the privatization of public services.

[ 4 ] Into the 21st century, it greatly affected Sweden and its universalistic welfare state, although not as hard as Finland. Sweden remained more Eurosceptic than Finland, and its struggles affected all the other Nordic countries, as it was seen as "the guiding star of the north", and with Sweden fading away, other Nordic countries also felt like they were losing their political identities.

[ 12 ] When the Nordic model was then gradually rediscovered, cultural explanations were sought for the special features of the Nordic countries.

[ 12 ] Reception [ edit ] The Nordic model has been positively received by some American politicians and political commentators.

Jerry Mander has likened the Nordic model to a kind of "hybrid" system which features a blend of capitalist economics with socialist values, representing an alternative to American-style capitalism .

[ 91 ] Vermont Senator Bernie Sanders has pointed to Scandinavia and the Nordic model as something the United States can learn from, in particular with respect to the benefits and social protections the Nordic model affords workers and its provision of universal healthcare.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] [ 94 ] Scandinavian political scientist Daniel Schatz argued that Sanders is wrong, saying that "the success of Nordic countries like Sweden – as measured by relatively high living standards accompanied by low poverty, with government-funded education through university, universal health coverage, generous parental-leave policies and long life spans – precedes the contemporary welfare state.", adding that "Research has suggested that the Northern European success story has its roots in cultural rather than economic factors. The Scandinavian countries ... historically developed remarkably high levels of social trust, a robust work ethic and considerable social cohesion".

[ 95 ] According to Luciano Pellicani , the social and political measures adopted in countries like Sweden and Denmark are the same that some other European left-wing politicians theorised to combine justice and freedom , referring to liberal socialism and movements like Giustizia e Libertà and Fabian Society .

[ 96 ] According to Naomi Klein , former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev sought to move the Soviet Union in a similar direction to the Nordic system, combining free markets with a social safety net, but still retaining public ownership of key sectors of the economy – ingredients that he believed would transform the Soviet Union into "a socialist beacon for all mankind." [ 97 ] [ 98 ] The Nordic model has also been positively received by various social scientists and economists. American professor of sociology and political science Lane Kenworthy advocates for the United States to make a gradual transition toward a social democracy similar to those of the Nordic countries, defining social democracy as such: "The idea behind social democracy was to make capitalism better. There is disagreement about how exactly to do that, and others might think the proposals in my book aren't true social democracy. But I think of it as a commitment to use government to make life better for people in a capitalist economy. To a large extent, that consists of using public insurance programs – government transfers and services." [ 99 ] Nobel Prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz says that there is higher social mobility in the Scandinavian countries than in the United States and posits that Scandinavia is now the land of opportunity that the United States once was.

[ 100 ] American author Ann Jones , who lived in Norway for four years, posits that "the Nordic countries give their populations freedom from the market by using capitalism as a tool to benefit everyone" whereas in the United States " neoliberal politics puts the foxes in charge of the henhouse, and capitalists have used the wealth generated by their enterprises (as well as financial and political manipulations) to capture the state and pluck the chickens." [ 101 ] Economist Jeffrey Sachs is a proponent of the Nordic model, having pointed out that the Nordic model is "the proof that modern capitalism can be combined with decency, fairness, trust, honesty, and environmental sustainability." [ 102 ] The Nordic combination of extensive public provision of welfare and a culture of individualism has been described by Lars Trägårdh of Ersta Sköndal University College as " statist individualism ." [ 53 ] A 2016 survey by the think tank Israel Democracy Institute found that nearly 60 percent of Israeli Jews preferred a "Scandinavian model" economy, with high taxes and a robust welfare state.

[ 103 ] Criticism [ edit ] Socialist economists Pranab Bardhan and John Roemer criticize Nordic-style social democracy for its questionable effectiveness in promoting relative egalitarianism as well as its sustainability . They posit that Nordic social democracy requires a strong labour movement to sustain the heavy redistribution required, arguing that it is idealistic to think similar levels of redistribution can be accomplished in countries with weaker labour movements. They say that even in the Scandinavian countries social democracy has been in decline since the weakening of the labour movement in the early 1990s, arguing that the sustainability of social democracy is limited. Roemer and Bardham posit that establishing a market-based socialist economy by changing enterprise ownership would be more effective than social democratic redistribution at promoting egalitarian outcomes, particularly in countries with weak labour movements.

[ 104 ] Historian Guðmundur Jónsson said that it would be historically inaccurate to include Iceland in one aspect of the Nordic model, that of consensus democracy . Addressing the time period from 1950 to 2000, Jónsson writes that "Icelandic democracy is better described as more adversarial than consensual in style and practice. The labour market was rife with conflict and strikes more frequent than in Europe, resulting in strained government–trade union relationship. Secondly, Iceland did not share the Nordic tradition of power-sharing or corporatism as regards labour market policies or macro-economic policy management, primarily because of the weakness of Social Democrats and the Left in general. Thirdly, the legislative process did not show a strong tendency towards consensus-building between government and opposition with regard to government seeking consultation or support for key legislation. Fourthly, the political style in legislative procedures and public debate in general tended to be adversarial rather than consensual in nature." [ 105 ] In a 2017 study, economists James Heckman and Rasmus Landersøn compared American and Danish social mobility, and found that social mobility is not as high as figures might suggest in the Nordic countries, although they did find that Denmark ranks higher in income mobility. When looking exclusively at wages (before taxes and transfers), Danish and American social mobility are very similar; it is only after taxes and transfers are taken into account that Danish social mobility improves, indicating that Danish economic redistribution policies are the key drivers of greater mobility. Additionally, Denmark's greater investment in public education did not improve educational mobility significantly, meaning children of non-college educated parents are still unlikely to receive college education, although this public investment did result in improved cognitive skills amongst poor Danish children compared to their American peers. There was evidence that generous welfare policies could discourage the pursuit of higher-level education due to decreasing the economic benefits that college education level jobs offer and increasing welfare for workers of a lower education level.

[ 106 ] Some welfare and gender researchers based in the Nordic countries suggest that these states have often been over-privileged when different European societies are being assessed in terms of how far they have achieved gender equality. They posit that such assessments often utilise international comparisons adopting conventional economic, political, educational, and well-being measures.

[ 107 ] By contrast, they suggest that if one takes a broader perspective on well-being incorporating, such as social issues associated with bodily integrity or bodily citizenship, [ 108 ] then some major forms of men's domination still stubbornly persist in the Nordic countries, e.g. business, violence to women, sexual violence to children, the military, academia, and religion.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] [ 111 ] While praising the Nordic model as a "clear and compelling contrast to the neoliberal ideology that has strafed the rest of the world with inequality, ill-health and needless poverty," economic anthropologist Jason Hickel sharply criticizes the "ecological disaster" that accompanies it, noting that data shows the Nordic countries "have some of the highest levels of resource use and CO2 emissions in the world, in consumption based terms, drastically overshooting safe planetary boundaries," and rank towards the bottom of the Sustainable Development Index. He argues that the model needs to be updated for the Anthropocene , and reduce overconsumption while retaining the positive elements of progressive social democracy including universal healthcare and education, paid vacations and reasonable working hours, which have resulted in much better health outcomes and poverty reduction compared to overtly neoliberal countries like the United States, in order to "stand as a beacon for the rest of the world in the 21st century." [ 112 ] [ 113 ] Swedish economist John Gustavsson, writing for American conservative magazine The Dispatch , criticized the Nordic model for its high taxation rates, including on the middle class and poor people.

[ 114 ] Political scientist Michael Cottakis has noted the rise of right-wing populist and anti-immigration sentiment in the Nordic countries, arguing that these countries, in particular Sweden, have failed to handle immigration effectively.

[ 115 ] Misconceptions [ edit ] George Lakey , author of Viking Economics , says that Americans generally misunderstand the nature of the Nordic model, commenting: "Americans imagine that "welfare state" means the U.S. welfare system on steroids. Actually, the Nordics scrapped their American-style welfare system at least 60 years ago, and substituted universal services, which means everyone – rich and poor – gets free higher education, free medical services, free eldercare, etc." [ 116 ] In a speech at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government, Lars Løkke Rasmussen , the centre-right Danish prime minister from the conservative-liberal Venstre party, addressed the American misconception that the Nordic model is a form of socialism, which is conflated with any form of planned economy , stating: "I know that some people in the US associate the Nordic model with some sort of socialism. Therefore, I would like to make one thing clear. Denmark is far from a socialist planned economy. Denmark is a market economy." [ 117 ] See also [ edit ] Dirigisme , a socioeconomic model associated with France Folkhemmet Liberal socialism Market socialism Nefco Polder model Rehn–Meidner model Rhenish model , a socioeconomic model associated with Germany Social democracy Social market economy Welfare in Finland Welfare in Sweden Lists [ edit ] Human Development Index Legatum Prosperity Index List of countries by GDP per capita List of countries by income equality List of countries by life expectancy List of countries by share of income of the richest one percent List of countries by wealth per adult List of international rankings Press Freedom Index Social Progress Index Where-to-be-born Index References [ edit ] ^ Simon, Carsta (20 December 2017).

"Why Norwegians Don't Have Their Pigs in the Forest: Enlightening the Nordic Art of 'Co-operation' " .

Behavior and Social Issues .

26 : 172.

doi : 10.5210/bsi.v26i0.7317 .

hdl : 10642/5688 .

ISSN 1064-9506 .

^ Kjellberg, Anders (2019).

"Sweden: Collective Bargaining Under the Industry Norm" Archived 25 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine . In Müller, Torsten; Vandaele, Kurt; Waddington, Jeremy, eds. (2019).

Collective Bargaining in Europe: Towards an Endgame . Brussels: European Trade Union Institute.

III . pp. 583–604.

ISBN 978-2874525148 .

^ Rosser, J. Barkley; Rosser, Marina V. (2003).

Comparative Economics in a Transforming World Economy (2nd ed.). Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. p. 226.

ISBN 978-0262182348 .

^ a b c d e f Simon Reid, Henry (2015).

The Political Origins of Inequality: Why a More Equal World Is Better for Us All . University of Chicago Press. p. 132.

ISBN 978-0226236797 .

The dynamics were slightly different in each country. The social welfare reforms that emerged out of the Kanslergae Agreement in Denmark in 1933 came at the height of the interwar economic crisis and was part of a wider compromise package to save the Danish economy. It was a coincidence, but a telling one, that on the same day that the agreement was ratified, Hitler was appointed Chancellor of the Reich in Berlin, convinced that he had a better way of saving the economy. In Sweden, the politics of grand compromise were pushed forward with the so-called Basic Agreement – essentially a commitment to the spirit of give-and-take in labour disputes – signed by the employer and labour union associations at the unprepossessing seaside retreat of Saltsjobaden in 1938 ... But in truth the Agreement was the foundation for the relative industrial harmony that would mark Scandinavian industrial relations throughout Europe's Golden Age. In Norway, the empowerment of women as well as workers was key. Women workers marched in 1905 and achieved limited suffrage in 1907, with full suffrage coming in 1913, some five years before it came to Sweden.

^ Sandbu, Martin (28 August 2018).

"What the Nordic mixed economy can teach today's new left" .

Financial Times .

Archived from the original on 24 October 2019 . Retrieved 3 December 2019 .

^ a b "Norway: The rich cousin" .

The Economist . 2 February 2013.

Archived from the original on 15 March 2018 . Retrieved 27 October 2014 .

^ Lane, Kenworthy (2013).

Social Democratic America . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 138.

ISBN 978-0199322527 .

Archived from the original on 3 November 2023 . Retrieved 28 February 2020 .

^ Sanandaji, Nima (27 October 2021).

"Nordic Countries Aren't Actually Socialist" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved 9 July 2025 .

^ a b "The Nordic countries: The next supermodel" .

The Economist . 2 February 2013.

Archived from the original on 17 June 2015 . Retrieved 27 July 2016 .

^ Hicks, Alexander (2000).

Social Democracy and Welfare Capitalism: A Century of Income Security Politics .

Cornell University Press . p.

130 .

ISBN 978-0801485565 .

By the late 1950s, labor had been incorporated alongside Swedish business in fully elaborated corporatist institutions of collective bargaining and policy making, public as well as private, supply-side (as for labour training) as well as demand side (e.g., Keynesian). During the 1950s and 1960s, similar neocorpratist institutions developed in Denmark and Norway, in Austria and the Netherlands, and somewhat later, in Belgium and Finland.

^ Helliwell, John; et al. (20 March 2020).

"World Happiness Report 2020" . United Nations Sustainable Development Solutions Network.

Archived from the original on 6 December 2020 . Retrieved 3 December 2020 .

^ a b c d e f g h Liukas, Christa (1 November 2019).

"The Nordic brand replaced the welfare state – did politics disappear from the Nordic model?" . University of Helsinki.

Archived from the original on 19 August 2020 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 .

^ a b Dolvik, Jon Erick; Flotten, Tone; Hippe, Jon M.; Jordfald, Bard (2015).

The Nordic Model towards 2030: A New Chapter? NordMod2030 . p. 23.

ISBN 978-8232401857 .

The Nordic model therefore cannot exclusively be tied to social democratic party support and political dominance. In Sweden, Denmark and Norway, where the social democrats held power for large periods from the 1930s onwards, that description fits better than it does for Finland and Iceland, where centrist and right-leaning parties have set the terms of debate. But in these countries, too, the building of strong labour unions – in line with Walter Korpi's power resource mobilization thesis (Korpi 1981) – was crucial to the central role of labour and employer organizations in developing universal welfare schemes. A variety of modern social security programmes, whether sickness benefits or pensions, first appeared in negotiated collective agreements. It is moreover likely that inspirational ideas and learning experiences that passed between Nordic countries also transcended party lines within these countries. The political underpinnings of the Nordic model have thus been built on broadbased power mobilization and a higher degree of balance between the core interests in society than is evident in most other countries.

^ Petersen, Klaus (March 2009).

"Constructing Nordic Welfare? Nordic Social Political Cooperation" (PDF) . In Christiansen, Niels Finn; Edling, Nils; Haave, Per; Petersen, Klaus (eds.).

The Nordic Model of Welfare: A Historical Reappraisal . Copenaghen: Museum Tusculanum Press. pp.

67– 96.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 October 2017 . Retrieved 3 October 2020 – via Helsinki University.

^ a b Kautto, Mikko; Kuitto, Kati (2021). Béland, Daniel; Leibfried, Stephan; Morgan, Kimberly J.; Obinger, Herbert (eds.).

The Nordic Countries . Oxford University Press. pp.

802– 825.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198828389.013.46 .

ISBN 978-0198828389 .

Archived from the original on 26 December 2021 . Retrieved 27 December 2021 .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ a b c d e f g h i Andersen, Torben M.; Holmström, Bengt; Honkapohja, Seppo; Korkman, Sixten; Söderström, Hans Tson; Vartiainen, Juhana (2007).

The Nordic Model: Embracing globalization and sharing risks (PDF) . Yliopistopaino, Helsinki: Taloustieto Oy.

ISBN 978-9516284685 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 June 2013 . Retrieved 26 July 2016 .

^ "Healthcare in Sweden" . Sweden. 12 June 2015.

Archived from the original on 17 October 2019 . Retrieved 3 December 2019 .

^ "Economy Rankings" .

Doing Business . The World Bank Group. 2016.

Archived from the original on 6 February 2015 . Retrieved 26 July 2016 .

^ a b 20 March 2020.

The Nordic Exceptionalism: What Explains Why the Nordic Countries Are Constantly Among the Happiest in the World.

Archived 26 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine WHR 2020. Chapter 7. Retrieved: 2 September 2021.

^ "Democracy Index 2020: In sickness and in health?" .

EIU.com .

Archived from the original on 3 March 2021 . Retrieved 2 February 2021 .

^ "CPI 2022" .

Transparency International . 31 January 2023.

Archived from the original on 16 April 2023 . Retrieved 31 January 2023 .

^ "The Nordic Model" . In focus 2001. Nordic Labour Journal.

Archived from the original on 7 September 2019 . Retrieved 26 July 2016 .

^ Anders Kjellberg (2017) "Self-regulation versus State Regulation in Swedish Industrial Relations" . In Mia Rönnmar and Jenny Julén Votinius (eds.) Festskrift till Ann Numhauser-Henning . Lund: Juristförlaget i Lund 2017, pp. 357–383.

^ Bruhn, Anders; Kjellberg, Anders; Sandberg, Åke (2013).

"A New World of Work Challenging Swedish Unions" . In Sandberg, Åke; Allvin, Michael (eds.).

Nordic Lights. Work, Management and Welfare in Scandinavia . Stockholm. pp.

126– 186.

ISBN 978-9186949372 .

OCLC 860835691 .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2022 . Retrieved 25 September 2022 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "Trade Union Density" .

OECD StatExtracts .

OECD . 2013.

Archived from the original on 13 August 2019 . Retrieved 26 July 2016 .

^ "Collective bargaining coverage" . OECD.

Archived from the original on 3 November 2017 . Retrieved 30 June 2021 .

^ a b Kjellberg, Anders (4 April 2006).

"The Swedish unemployment insurance – will the Ghent system survive?" (pdf) .

Transfer European Review of Labour and Research; Quarterly Review of the Etui Research Department .

Transfer: European Review of Labour and Research .

12 : 87– 98.

doi : 10.1177/102425890601200109 .

ISSN 1024-2589 .

S2CID 153819218 .

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 26 July 2016 – via Lund University.

^ Anders Kjellberg (2025) ”Changes in union density in the Nordic countries” , Nordic Economic Policy Review , pp. 124-129 (Nordregio and the Nordic Council of Ministers).

^ Wearing, David (22 May 2014).

"Where's the worst place to be a worker? Most of the world" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 6 November 2018 . Retrieved 27 July 2016 .

^ "Public finance and budgets | OECD" .

OECD . 13 March 2025.

^ Revenue Statistics 2024 . OECD. 21 November 2024.

doi : 10.1787/c87a3da5-en .

ISBN 978-92-64-42218-6 .

^ Magne Mogstad, Kjell Salvanes, Gaute Torsvik (12 February 2025).

"Income Equality in The Nordic Countries: Myths, Facts, and Lessons" .

Becker Friedman Institute for Economics : 20.

SSRN 5133608 – via Social Science Research Network.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Gregoire, Carolyn (1 August 2015).

"The Happiest Countries In The World" .

The Huffington Post (published 10 September 2013).

Archived from the original on 20 October 2017 . Retrieved 27 July 2016 .

^ Rankin, Jennifer (20 March 2017).

"Happiness is on the wane in the US, UN global report finds" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2020 . Retrieved 6 August 2017 .

^ Sachs, Jeffrey (2006). "Revisiting the Nordic Model: Evidence on Recent Macroeconomic Performance".

Perspectives on the Performance of the Continental Economies . Center for Capitalism & Society, Venice Summer Institute. pp.

387– 412.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.456.340 .

doi : 10.7551/mitpress/9780262015318.003.0012 .

ISBN 978-0262015318 .

First, like the Anglo-Saxon economies, the Nordic economies are overwhelmingly private-sector owned, open to trade, and oriented to international markets. Financial, labor, and product market forces operate powerfully throughout non-state sector. In short, these are capitalist economies. ... Second, there is no single Nordic model, and still less, an unchanging Nordic model. What has been consistently true for decades is a high level of public social outlays as a share of national income, and a sustained commitment to social insurance and redistributive social support for the poor, disabled, and otherwise vulnerable parts of the population.

^ McWhinney, James E. (25 June 2013).

"The Nordic Model: Pros and Cons" . Investopedia.

Archived from the original on 9 February 2019 . Retrieved 16 September 2015 .

The Nordic model is a term coined to capture the unique combination of free market capitalism and social benefits that have given rise to a society that enjoys a host of top-quality services, including free education and free healthcare, as well as generous, guaranteed pension payments for retirees. These benefits are funded by taxpayers and administered by the government for the benefit of all citizens.

^ "State Shareholdings in Finland" .

Valtioneuvoston kanslia . Prime Minister's Office/Ministry of Trade and Industry. 2006.

Archived from the original on 26 August 2021 . Retrieved 31 August 2021 .

^ "State shareholdings and parliamentary authorisations" .

Valtioneuvoston kanslia . 8 April 2022.

Archived from the original on 26 May 2022 . Retrieved 28 April 2022 .

^ "State-owned enterprises" .

Regeringskansliet . Government Offices of Sweden. 7 November 2014.

Archived from the original on 26 August 2021 . Retrieved 31 August 2021 .

^ "The State Ownership Report" (PDF) .

Regjeringen . Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries. 2019.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 August 2021 . Retrieved 31 August 2021 .

^ Bruening, Matt (5 August 2017).

"Nordic Socialism Is Realer Than You Think" . People's Policy Project.

Archived from the original on 26 August 2021 . Retrieved 31 August 2021 .

^ "The secret of their success" .

The Economist . 31 January 2013.

Archived from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 31 August 2021 .

^ Hopkin, Jonathan ; Lapuente, Victor; Moller, Lovisa (29 January 2014).

"Lower levels of inequality are linked with greater innovation in economies" .

London School of Economics .

Archived from the original on 19 February 2016 . Retrieved 27 June 2016 .

^ Lane, Kenworthy (2013).

Social Democratic America . New York City: Oxford University Press . pp.

88 –93.

ISBN 978-0199322527 .

^ "The Collective Agreement" . 6 May 2013.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2023 . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

^ "Solidaristic wage policy" . 18 February 2019.

Archived from the original on 20 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 December 2023 .

^ Erlandsen, Espen; Lundsgaard, Jens (2007).

"How Regulatory Reforms in Sweden Have Boosted Productivity" .

OECD Economics Department Working Paper . OECD Economics Department Working Papers (577). Paris: OECD Publishing.

doi : 10.1787/084244078600 .

^ Divided We Stand: Why Inequality Keeps Rising (paperback ed.). Paris: OECD Publishing. 2011.

ISBN 978-9264111639 .

Archived from the original on 9 July 2021 . Retrieved 30 June 2021 .

^ Nilsson, Patricia (29 August 2018).

"Swedish society's big divisions – in 6 charts" .

Financial Times .

Archived from the original on 19 October 2021 . Retrieved 31 August 2021 .

^ Hoikkala, Hanna (22 May 2019).

"Swedes Become World Champions With 100% Stashing Cash in Funds" .

BloombergQuint . Bloomberg News.

Archived from the original on 19 October 2021 . Retrieved 31 August 2021 .

^ Heyman, Fredrik; Norbäck, Pehr-Johan; Persson, Lars (24 June 2019). "The Turnaround of the Swedish Economy: Lessons from Large Business Sector Reforms".

The World Bank Research Observer .

34 (2): 274– 308.

doi : 10.1093/wbro/lky007 .

hdl : 10986/35085 .

ISSN 0257-3032 .

^ a b "Norway: The rich cousin – Oil makes Norway different from the rest of the region, but only up to a point" .

The Economist . 2 February 2013.

Archived from the original on 15 March 2018 . Retrieved 1 January 2016 .

^ a b "The secret of their success" .

The Economist . 2 February 2013.

Archived from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 21 December 2019 .

^ Savage, Maddy (10 July 2018).

"Unlike most millennials, Norway's are rich" . BBC News.

Archived from the original on 11 July 2018 . Retrieved 11 July 2018 .

^ Brandal, Nik; Bratberg, Øivind; Thorsen, Dag (2013).

The Nordic model of social democracy . Springer. p. 2.

doi : 10.1057/9781137013279 .

ISBN 978-1349436699 .

^ Brandal, Nik; Bratberg, Øivind; Thorsen, Dag (2013).

The Nordic model of social democracy . Springer. pp. vi & 159.

doi : 10.1057/9781137013279 .

ISBN 978-1349436699 .

^ a b Ferragina, Emanuele; Seeleib-Kaiser, Martin (October 2011).

"Welfare Regime Debate: Past, Present, Futures?" (PDF) .

Policy and Politics .

39 (4). Policy Press: 583– 611.

doi : 10.1332/030557311X603592 .

S2CID 146986126 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 July 2021 . Retrieved 29 July 2021 .

^ Kenworthy, Lane (January 2014).

"America's Social Democratic Future" .

Foreign Affairs .

93 (January/February 2014).

Archived from the original on 24 December 2016 . Retrieved 2 April 2014 .

^ Kenworthy, Lane (1 March 2016).

"Social Democracy" .

The Next System Project .

Archived from the original on 8 May 2020 . Retrieved 27 April 2020 .

The chief goals social democracy attempts to realize, and that distinguish it from other actually-existing capitalisms, are economic security, equality (low inequality) of opportunity, and shared prosperity. ... Modern social democracy consists, to put it simply, of market capitalism plus generous and employment-friendly social policy... .

^ Schröder, Martin (2013).

Integrating Varieties of Capitalism and Welfare State Research . London: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 96, 144– 145, 149, 155, 157.

^ Markkola, Pirjo (2011). Kettunen, Pauli; Petersen, Klaus (eds.).

"The Lutheran Nordic Welfare States" .

Beyond Welfare State Models. Transnational Historical Perspectives on Social Policy . Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing: 102– 118.

ISBN 978-1849809603 .

Archived from the original on 3 November 2023 . Retrieved 27 August 2020 – via Google Books.

^ a b Kettunen, Pauli (2010).

"The Sellers of Labour Power as Social Citizens: A Utopian Wage Work Society in the Nordic Visions of Welfare" (PDF) .

NordWel Studies in Historical Welfare State Research : 16– 45.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 August 2020 . Retrieved 11 January 2020 .

^ Sinnemäki, Kaius; Portman, Anneli; Tilli, Jouni; Nelson, Robert H, eds. (2019).

On the Legacy of Lutheranism in Finland: Societal Perspectives .

doi : 10.21435/sfh.25 .

ISBN 978-9518581355 .

Archived from the original on 23 October 2020 . Retrieved 11 September 2020 .

^ Nelson, Robert H. (2017).

Lutheranism and the Nordic Spirit of Social Democracy: A Different Protestant Ethic . Bristol: ISD. pp. 21, 121.

ISBN 978-87-7184-416-0 .

Archived from the original on 3 November 2023 . Retrieved 11 January 2020 – via Google Books.

^ Hilson, Mary (2008).

The Nordic Model: Scandinavia since 1945 . London: Reaktion Books. pp.

112– 133.

ISBN 978-1861894618 .

Archived from the original on 3 November 2023 . Retrieved 28 February 2020 – via Google Books.

^ Rosser, Mariana V.; Rosser Jr., J. Barkley (2003).

Comparative Economics in a Transforming World Economy . MIT Press. p. 226.

ISBN 978-0262182348 .

Liberal corporatism is largely self-organized between labor and management, with only a supporting role for government. Leading examples of such systems are found in small, ethnically homogeneous countries with strong traditions of social democratic or labor party rule, such as Sweden's Nordic neighbors. Using a scale of 0.0 to 2.0 and subjectively assigning values based on six previous studies, Frederic Pryor in 1988 found Norway and Sweden the most corporatist at 2.0 each, followed by Austria at 1.8, the Netherlands at 1.5, Finland, Denmark, and Belgium at 1.3 each, and Switzerland and West Germany at 1.0 each. ... [W]ith the exception of Iceland, all the Nordic countries have higher taxes, larger welfare states, and greater corporatist tendencies than most social market economies.

^ McWhinney, James E. (25 June 2013).

"The Nordic Model: Pros and Cons" . Investopedia.

Archived from the original on 9 February 2019 . Retrieved 16 September 2015 .

The model is underpinned by a capitalist economy that encourages creative destruction. While the laws make it is easy for companies to shed workers and implement transformative business models, employees are supported by generous social welfare programs.

^ Esping-Andersen, G. (1991).

The three worlds of welfare capitalism . Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press .

^ a b The Nordic Council.

"About the Nordic welfare model" . Norden. Archived from the original on 7 April 2014 . Retrieved 2 April 2014 .

^ a b c "Is the Last Mile the Longest?" (PDF) .

Nordic Council of Ministers . May 2018.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 June 2019 . Retrieved 21 April 2019 – via OECD.

^ a b "Which countries have the highest gender gap in the workplace?" .

International Labor Organization . 6 June 2017.

Archived from the original on 5 February 2020 . Retrieved 12 January 2020 .

^ Moustgaard, Ulrikke (19 October 2017).

"Nordic family policies – between quotas and freedom of choice" .

Nordic Information on Gender . Archived from the original on 23 May 2019 . Retrieved 1 April 2019 .

^ "Thursday's papers: Finland's gender pay gap, our duty to help, and cheaper microbreweries" .

YLE . 2 August 2018.

Archived from the original on 21 April 2019 . Retrieved 1 April 2019 .

^ Drum, Kevin (26 September 2013).

"We Can Reduce Poverty If We Want To. We Just Have To Want To" .

Mother Jones .

Archived from the original on 16 November 2019 . Retrieved 5 October 2013 .

^ a b c "Compare your country – Income distribution and poverty" .

OECD .

Archived from the original on 3 November 2023 . Retrieved 12 May 2015 .

^ Peter Sawyer: The Making of Sweden . 1988, pp. 3–4 ^ Arnulf Krause: Die Welt der Wikinger . Campus, Frankfurt/Main 2006, pp. 155–158 ^ Staecker, Jörn (2000). "Die normierte Bestattung – Gotlands Kirchfriedhöfe im Spiegel mittelalterlicher Normen und Gesetze" [The standardized burial – Gotland's church cemeteries as reflected in medieval norms and laws]. In Ruhe, Doris; Spieß, Karl-Heinz (eds.).

Prozesse der Normbildung und Normveränderung im mittelalterlichen Europa [ Processes of norm formation and norm change in medieval Europe ] (in German). Stuttgart: Steiner. p. 149f.

^ Rasmussen, Magnus Bergli (2022).

"Farmers and the Origin of the Welfare State: Evidence from 308 Roll Call Votes between 1882 and 1940" .

Scandinavian Political Studies .

45 (2): 202– 226.

doi : 10.1111/1467-9477.12222 .

ISSN 0080-6757 .

Archived from the original on 11 March 2022 . Retrieved 11 March 2022 .

^ Veggel, Noralv (2014).

"The Nordic Model – Its Arrival and Decline" .

Global Journal of Management and Business Research: Administration and Management .

14 (9): 60– 94.

ISSN 2249-4588 .

Archived from the original on 9 October 2020 . Retrieved 30 March 2020 .

^ "Finland and the euro" .

Economy and Finance . 1 January 1999.

Archived from the original on 12 September 2023 . Retrieved 29 August 2023 .

^ Demurtas, Alice (9 May 2018).

"Iceland No Longer Following Nordic Welfare Model" .

The Reykjavík Grapevine .

Archived from the original on 31 August 2021 . Retrieved 31 August 2021 .

^ "Government at a Glance 2021: Country Fact Sheet" (PDF) .

OECD . 2021.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 June 2023 . Retrieved 24 June 2023 .

^ Fagerberg, Jan; Cappelen, Adne; Mjøset, Lars; Skarstein, Rune (May 1990).

"The Decline of Social-Democratic State Capitalism in Norway" .

New Left Review : 60– 94 . Retrieved 30 March 2020 .

Norway has, together with Sweden, often been idealized as the most successful case of postwar social democracy...the neo-liberal 'blue wave' which rolled over Western Europe in the 1980s has had considerably greater impact in Norway than in Sweden, combining with the pressures of a destabilized international economy to threaten many of the postwar structures. This makes it easier to appreciate the earlier accomplishments of social democracy, but it also shows that the Nordic innovations often depended upon the convergence of specific national conditions with the dynamic phase of Western capitalism that lasted from 1945 to 1973.

^ Acher, John (6 September 2007).

"Update 1-Statistics Norway raises '07 GDP outlook, cuts '08" .

Reuters . Archived from the original on 8 May 2020 . Retrieved 21 May 2020 .

^ Carson, Marcus (2004).

From Common Market to Social Europe?: Paradigm Shift & Institutional Change in European Union Policy on Food, Asbestos & Chemicals, & Gender Equality . Stockholm: Stockholm University. p. 231.

ISBN 978-9122020882 .

^ O'Hara, Phillip (1999).

Encyclopedia of Political Economy: L–Z . London: Routledge. p. 1248.

ISBN 978-0415154260 .

^ Berman, Sheri (2006).

The Primacy of Politics: Social Democracy and the Making of Europe's Twentieth Century . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 156.

ISBN 978-1139457590 .

^ Moschonas, Gerassimos (2002).

In the Name of Social Democracy: The Great Transformation, 1945 to the Present . Translated by Elliott, Gregory. London: Verso Books. pp.

69– 70.

ISBN 978-1859846391 .

^ O'Hara, Phillip (1999).

Encyclopedia of Political Economy: L–Z . Routledge. p. 1248.

ISBN 978-0415154260 .

The critical issues were perhaps revealed most clearly in the Swedish case. Among the most advanced of the social welfare states, Sweden in the early 1980s faced a pivotal choice between capitalism and the transition to socialism. In the discourse focused upon its nagging problems of international imbalances, declining competitiveness, and capital flight, two polar solutions emerged. Olof Palme supported an aggressive use of workers' funds, by which capital formation would have been largely collectivized in two generations. The funds would have come to own predominant stakes in Swedish corporations on behalf of workers. The other alternative was to retrench the welfare state and provide conditions favorable to private capitals formation. Palme's proposal appears never to have garnered widespread support and was left with no champion in the wake of his assassination.

^ Mander, Jerry (24 July 2013).

"There Are Good Alternatives to US Capitalism, But No Way to Get There" .

Alternet .

Archived from the original on 20 October 2017 . Retrieved 27 July 2013 .

^ Sanders, Bernie (26 May 2013).

"What Can We Learn From Denmark?" .

The Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on 10 December 2015 . Retrieved 11 March 2014 .

^ Issenberg, Sasha (9 January 2010).

"Sanders a growing force on the far, far left" .

Boston Globe .

Archived from the original on 4 April 2014 . Retrieved 11 March 2014 .

You go to Scandinavia, and you will find that people have a much higher standard of living, in terms of education, health care, and decent paying jobs.

^ Aleem, Zeeshan (4 May 2015).

"Bernie Sanders Says the U.S. Could Learn a Lot From Scandinavia. Here's Why He's Right" .

Mic .

Archived from the original on 5 May 2015 . Retrieved 5 May 2015 .

^ Schatz, Daniel (15 March 2020).

"I'm a Scandinavian political scientist. Bernie's wrong about democratic socialism" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on 7 July 2023 . Retrieved 6 July 2023 .

^ Petti, Edoardo (1 December 2014).

"Le critiche di D'Alema alla Terza Via? Frutto della presunzione storica del Pci. Parla Pellicani" .

Formiche.net (in Italian).

Archived from the original on 21 February 2022 . Retrieved 28 February 2022 .

^ Klein, Naomi (2008).

The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism .

Picador . p. 276.

ISBN 978-0312427993 .

Archived from the original on 3 November 2023 . Retrieved 28 February 2020 .

^ Whyman, Philip; Baimbridge, Mark; Mullen, Andrew (2012).

The Political Economy of the European Social Model (Routledge Studies in the European Economy) .

Routledge . p. 108.

ISBN 978-0415476294 .

Archived from the original on 3 November 2023 . Retrieved 28 February 2020 .

In short, Gorbachev aimed to lead the Soviet Union towards the Scandinavian social democratic model.

^ Matthews, Dylan (9 January 2014).

"This sociologist has a plan to make America more like Sweden" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 14 January 2014 . Retrieved 11 March 2014 .

^ " 'Scandinavian Dream' is true fix for America's income inequality" .

CNN Money . 3 June 2015.

Archived from the original on 8 June 2020 . Retrieved 21 December 2019 .

^ "After I Lived in Norway, America Felt Backward. Here's Why" .

The Nation . 28 January 2016.

Archived from the original on 30 January 2020 . Retrieved 21 December 2019 .

^ "Prof Jeffrey Sachs' plea to the Nordic countries" .

Global Health Minders . 18 November 2015. Archived from the original on 1 September 2019 . Retrieved 21 December 2019 .

^ Sales, Ben (23 May 2016).

"Survey: Israeli Jews Want Broader Welfare State, Israeli Arabs Prefer 'American Model' " .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 20 October 2017 . Retrieved 21 December 2019 .

^ Bardhan, Pranab; Roemer, Johen E. (1992).

"Market socialism, a case for rejuvenation" .

Journal of Economic Perspectives .

6 (3): 104.

doi : 10.1257/jep.6.3.101 .

[W]e believe that social democracy requires rather special political circumstances that are absent in many countries for which our market socialism proposal may be feasible. Since it (social democracy) permits a powerful capitalist class to exist (90 percent of productive assets are privately owned in Sweden), only a strong and unified labor movement can win the redistribution through taxes that is characteristic of social democracy. It is idealistic to believe that tax concessions of this magnitude can be effected simply through electoral democracy without an organized labor movement, when capitalists organize and finance influential political parties. Even in the Scandinavian countries, strong apex labor organizations have been difficult to sustain and social democracy is somewhat on the decline now.

^ Jónsson, Guðmundur (8 August 2014). "Iceland and the Nordic Model of Consensus Democracy".

Scandinavian Journal of History .

39 (4): 510– 528.

doi : 10.1080/03468755.2014.935473 .

ISSN 0346-8755 .

S2CID 143545092 .

^ Heckman, James; Landersøn, Rasmus (2017).

"The Scandinavian Fantasy: The Sources of Intergenerational Mobility in Denmark and the US" (PDF) .

Scandinavian Journal of Economics .

119 (1): 178– 230.

doi : 10.1111/sjoe.12219 .

PMC 5476927 .

PMID 28649168 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 July 2017 . Retrieved 7 June 2017 .

^ "Mind the 100 Year Gap: 2020" .

World Economic Forum . 2019.

Archived from the original on 13 February 2021 . Retrieved 19 January 2021 .

^ Pringle, Keith (2016). "Doing (Oppressive) Gender via Men's Relations with Children". In Häyrén, Anneli; Wahlström Henriksson, Helena (eds.).

Critical Perspectives on Masculinities and Relationalities: In Relation to What?

. New York: Springer. pp.

23– 34.

ISBN 978-3319290119 .

^ Hearn, Jeff; Pringle, Keith (2006).

European Perspectives on Men and Masculinities: National and Transnational Approaches . Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0230594470 .

^ Pringle, Keith (2011). "Comparative Studies of Well-Being in Terms of Gender, Ethnicity and the Concept of Bodily Citizenship: Turning Esping-Andersen on His Head?". In Golańska, Dorota; Hearn, Jeff; Olesky, Elżbieta H. (eds.).

The Limits of Gendered Citizenship: Contexts and Complexities . London: Routledge. pp.

137– 156.

ISBN 978-0415851268 .

^ Balkamar, Dag; Hearn, Jeff; Pringle, Keith (2018). "Men, Masculinities and Social Policy". In Shaver, Sheila (ed.).

Handbook of Gender and Social Policy . Oxford: Edward Elgar. pp.

55– 73.

ISBN 978-1785367120 .

^ Hickel, Jason (6 December 2019).

"The dark side of the Nordic model" .

Al Jazeera .

Archived from the original on 29 June 2022 . Retrieved 29 June 2022 .

^ Sullivan, Dylan; Hickel, Jason (2023).

"Capitalism and extreme poverty: A global analysis of real wages, human height, and mortality since the long 16th century" .

World Development .

161 106026.

doi : 10.1016/j.worlddev.2022.106026 .

S2CID 252315733 .

...amongst the developed capitalist countries, the social democracies with generous welfare states (i.e., Scandinavia) have superior health outcomes to neo-liberal states like the US. Poverty alleviation and gains in human health have historically been linked to socialist political movements and public action, not to capitalism.

^ Gustavsson, John (12 October 2021).

"Why the Nordic Model Wouldn't Work in the U.S." The Dispatch .

Archived from the original on 18 June 2023 . Retrieved 18 June 2023 .

^ "What is wrong with the Nordic model?" .

EUROPP . 21 September 2018.

Archived from the original on 18 June 2023 . Retrieved 18 June 2023 .

^ "The "Continuing Revelation" of Scandinavian Economies" .

America . 22 July 2016.

Archived from the original on 1 September 2019 . Retrieved 21 December 2019 .

^ "Denmark's prime minister says Bernie Sanders is wrong to call his country socialist" .

Vox . 31 October 2015.

Archived from the original on 4 February 2020 . Retrieved 21 December 2019 .

Further reading [ edit ] Alestalo, Matti; Hort, Sven E. O.; Kuhnle, Stein (June 2009). "The Nordic Model: Conditions, Origins, Outcomes, Lessons".

Working Papers (41). Hertie School of Governance. 55860282.

Blyth, Mark (2001). "The Transformation of the Swedish Model: Economic Ideas, Distributional Conflict, and Institutional Change".

World Politics .

54 (1): 1– 26.

doi : 10.1353/wp.2001.0020 .

S2CID 154911616 .

Booth, Michael (2015).

The Almost Nearly Perfect People: Behind the Myth of the Scandinavian Utopia . London: Vintage Books.

ISBN 978-0099546078 .

Brandal, Nikolai; Bratberg, Øivind; Thorsen, Dag Einar (2013).

The Nordic Model of Social Democracy . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1137013262 .

Bucken-Knapp, Gregg (2009).

Defending the Swedish Model: Social Democrats, Trade Unions, and Labor Migration Policy Reform . Lanham: Lexington Books.

ISBN 978-0739138182 .

Christiansen, Niels Finn; et al. (2006).

The Nordic Model of Welfare: A Historical Reappraisal . Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press.

ISBN 978-8763503419 .

Hilson, Mary (2008).

The Nordic Model: Scandinavia Since 1945 . London: Reaktion.

ISBN 978-1861893666 .

Igbal, Razi; Todi, Padma (December 2015).

"The Nordic Model: Existence, Emergence and Sustainability" .

Procedia Economics and Finance .

30 : 336– 351.

doi : 10.1016/S2212-5671(15)01301-5 .

Kenworthy, Lane (2014).

Social Democratic America . Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0199322510 .

Kettunen, Pauli; Lundberg, Urban; Österberg, Mirja; Petersen, Klaus (2015). "The Nordic Model and the Rise and Fall of Nordic Cooperation". In Strang, Joahan (ed.).

Nordic Cooperation: A European Region in Transition (illustrated ed.). London: Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9781315755366-4 .

ISBN 978-1317626954 .

Kjellberg, Anders (2022) The Nordic Model of Industrial Relations Archived 24 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine . Lund: Department of Sociology.

Kjellberg, Anders (2023) The Nordic Model of Industrial Relations: comparing Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden Archived 21 December 2023 at the Wayback Machine . Department of Sociology, Lund University and Max Planck Institute for the Study of Societies, Cologne.

Kvist, Jon (2012).

Changing Social Equality: The Nordic Welfare Model in the 21st Century . Bristol: Policy Press.

ISBN 978-1847426604 .

Lakey, George (2016).

Viking Economics: How the Scandinavians Got It Right – and How We Can, Too . Brooklyn: Melville House .

ISBN 978-1612195360 .

Livingston, Michael A. (2021).

Dreamworld or Dystopia? The Nordic Model and Its Influence in the 21st Century . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Mjoset, Lars (Summer 1987). "Nordic Economic Policies in the 1970s and 1980s".

International Organization .

41 (3). Cambridge: The MIT Press: 403– 456.

doi : 10.1017/S0020818300027533 .

hdl : 10852/15263 .

JSTOR 2706751 .

S2CID 54187082 .

Partanen, Anu (2017).

The Nordic Theory of Everything: In Search of a Better Life . New York: HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0062316554 .

Sandberg, Åke, ed. (2013).

Nordic Lights: Work, Management and Welfare in Scandinavia . Stockholm: SNS Förlag.

ISBN 978-9186949372 .

Mobekk, Hilde; Simon, Carsta (2019).

"Dugnad: A Fact and a Narrative of Norwegian Prosocial Behavior" .

Perspectives on Behavior Science .

42 (4): 815– 834.

doi : 10.1007/s40614-019-00227-w .

PMC 6901638 .

PMID 31976461 .

Mirsafian, Arvand (2023). "Taylorism, Worker Resistance, and Industrial Relations in Sweden".

International Review of Social History .

68 (3): 429– 451.

doi : 10.1017/S002085902300041X .

External links [ edit ] "The Nordic Way" .

Archived 4 March 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Davos: World Economic Forum . January 2011. Retrieved 3 December 2019.

Thorsen, Dag Einar; Brandal, Nik; Bratberg, Øivind (8 April 2013).

Utopia sustained: "The Nordic model of social democracy" Archived 5 February 2018 at the Wayback Machine .

Fabian Society . Retrieved 3 December 2019.

"The secret of their success" .

The Economist . 2 February 2013. Retrieved 3 December 2019.

Sanders, Bernie (26 July 2013).

"What Can We Learn From Denmark?" .

The Huffington Post . Retrieved 3 December 2019.

Isaacs, Julia (25 September 2013).

"What Is Scandinavia Doing Right?" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 3 December 2019.

Stahl, Rune Møller Stahl; Mulvad, Andreas Møller (4 August 2015).

"What Makes Scandinavia Different?" .

Jacobin . Retrieved 3 December 2019.

"The Nordic Model: Local Government, Global Competitiveness in Denmark, Finland and Sweden" Archived 27 March 2023 at the Wayback Machine . KommuneKredit. August 2017. Retrieved 3 October 2020.

Goodman, Peter S. (11 July 2019).

"The Nordic Model May Be the Best Cushion Against Capitalism. Can It Survive Immigration?" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 3 October 2020.

"Om Norden" Archived 16 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine (in Swedish). Föreningen Norden. Retrieved 3 December 2019.

"The Nordic Model" .

Nordics . Aarhus University. Retrieved 3 October 2020.

v t e Capitalism Aspects and perspectives General Anarchy of production Business cycle Centralization Competition Competition law Depression definitions of capitalism Deregulation Economic bubble Economic development Economic liberalism Economic planning Entrepreneurship Ecopreneurship Externality Financial crisis Financial Revolution Globalization Global labor arbitrage History of capitalist theory Industrial Revolution Invention Market economy Market failure Merchantilism Meritocracy Multinational corporation Nationalization Oligopoly Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Privatization Profit Property rights Recession Regulation Wage labour Wealth Ideology Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Conservative Corporate Democratic Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neo Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social State State-sponsored Welfare Cultural aspects Advertising American Dream Black Friday Consumerism Decentralization Economic freedom Economic mobility Individualism Liberalism Liberty Mainstream Philanthropy Private foundation Private property Rule of law Social alienation Spontaneous order Social aspects Corporatism Economic inequality Employment Freedom of association Labour market flexibility Labour supply Productivity Prosperity Syndicate Social venture capital Unemployment Criticism Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Critique of political economy Critique of work Market fundamentalism Marxism Wage slavery Antithesis Anarchism Anarcho-communism Anarcho-primitivism Anarcho-syndicalism Collectivist anarchism Communalism Communism Economic democracy Eco-socialism Free-market socialism Green anarchism Individualist anarchism Libertarian socialism Market anarchism Market socialism Mutualism Post-capitalism Post-scarcity economy Sharing economy Social anarchism Socialism Syndicalism v t e Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Marxist Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Trade union Tripartisme Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Ambedkar Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blair Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Chávez Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman Jaurès Jenkins Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (father) Liebknecht (son) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Morales Myrdal Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Rustin Sanders Savage Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Woodsworth Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Party of European Socialists Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists By region Austria Germany United States Related Communism " The Internationale " Socialism Types of socialism Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Social models in Europe Anglo-Saxon Mediterranean Nordic Rhine Authority control databases International FAST National United States Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐vrqct
Cached time: 20250817073430
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.437 seconds
Real time usage: 1.603 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8351/1000000
Revision size: 110327/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 384515/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2241/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 535485/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.923/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8528388/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1327.045      1 -total
 61.53%  816.480      1 Template:Reflist
 20.37%  270.292     43 Template:Cite_book
 16.11%  213.823     24 Template:Cite_journal
 15.10%  200.350     36 Template:Cite_web
  9.03%  119.779      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.78%  116.514     22 Template:Cite_news
  8.38%  111.192      1 Template:Nordic_model
  4.88%   64.802      1 Template:Short_description
  3.40%   45.177     11 Template:Portal-inline Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:11595783:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817073430 and revision id 1306346691. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nordic_model&oldid=1306346691 " Categories : Nordic model Capitalism Corporatism Economic policy in Europe Economic systems Mixed economies Nordic politics Political-economic models Social democracy Welfare in Europe Politics of Denmark Politics of Finland Politics of Greenland Politics of Iceland Politics of Norway Politics of Sweden Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2025 Use British English from March 2019 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 07:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nordic model 41 languages Add topic

