Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Construction 3 Uses 4 Impacts 5 Torres Strait Islander boats 6 References Toggle the table of contents Aboriginal dugout canoe 1 language Gaeilge Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Australian Aboriginal boat Aboriginal dugout canoes were a significant advancement in canoe technology.

Dugout canoes may have been stronger, faster, and more efficient than previous types of bark canoes . The Australian Aboriginal peoples ' use of these canoes brought about many changes to both their hunting practices and society.

History [ edit ] Aboriginal people began using dugout canoes from around 1640 in coastal regions of northern Australia. They were brought by Buginese fishers of sea cucumbers , known as trepangers , from Makassar in South Sulawesi .

[ 1 ] In Arnhem Land , dugout canoes used by the local Yolngu people are called lipalipa [ 2 ] or lippa-lippa .

[ 1 ] Construction [ edit ] Aboriginal canoes were constructed much more easily than previous types of vessels, such as bark canoes. This ease of construction played a significant role in the dugout canoes’ widespread use. While earlier vessels required a great deal of labor and time-consuming sewing to make, dugout canoes were constructed easily and in a shorter period of time.

[ 3 ] First, one would have to cut down a tree and shape the exterior into an even form. The sides of the canoe were shaped in one of two ways. They were either carved straight up and down or in a "u" shape, curving in towards the center of the boat. Next, one would have to dig out the inner wood of the log to make space for the oarsmen to sit and paddle.

[ 4 ] In some early dugout canoes, Aboriginal people would not make the bottoms of the canoes smooth, but would instead carve "ribbing" into the vessel. Ribbing (literally sections of wood that looked like ribs) was used to stabilize bark canoes, and though not necessary to dugout canoes, was a carryover in the transition from one canoe type to the other.

[ 4 ] Both the chopping down of the tree and the digging out of the log were easily done with an iron- axe .

[ 5 ] The wood used in the construction of dugout canoes was essential to its strength and durability. A wide variety of trees were used depending upon the location of a particular people, but in most cases the Aboriginal people used a type of native sycamore , possibly Litsea reticulata or Cryptocarya glaucescens (Silver sycamore), White sycamore ( Polyscias elegans or Cryptocarya obovata ), Ceratopetalum succirubrum (Satin sycamore), Cardwellia sublimia , Cryptocarya hypospodia (Bastard Sycamore), Ceratopetalum virchowii (Pink Sycamore) or Ceratopetalum corymbosum (Mountain sycamore).

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Sycamores are strong and extremely durable, making them suitable for use in the construction of dugout canoes.

[ 4 ] Uses [ edit ] Both sea turtles and dugongs were essential components of the Aboriginal diet .

[ 3 ] The transformation from bark canoes to dugout canoes greatly increased the ability of the tribal hunters to catch and kill both of these types of sea creatures due primarily to a more formidable structure.  Dugout canoes included a stronger and better platform for harpooning that greatly increased the stability of an upright hunter by providing essential footing.

[ 3 ] In order to capture dugongs and sea turtles , the hunters needed to maintain the utmost degree of stealth. Perfect balance was required and the new dugout canoes gave the hunters this necessary edge.

[ 8 ] Additionally, the shift towards using dugout canoes maximized the overall possibilities of seafarers.  Not only did increased sturdiness, speed and stability of Dugout canoes make hunting easier, but these characteristics also allowed for long-distance travel.

[ 9 ] Whereas bark canoes had been only used for inland use or travel extremely close to the shore, Dugout canoes offered a far greater range of travel which allowed for trade outside the area of the village. Dugout canoes were capable of traveling distances over 500 km.

[ 3 ] This new vessel gave the Aboriginal people the ability and opportunity to explore, trade and locate additional resources located outside the central location.

Impacts [ edit ] The widespread use of dugout canoes had many impacts on Aboriginal life. The most significant were results of the Aboriginal peoples' ability to hunt larger prey. With the strength to transport larger prey over longer distances, dugout enabled the peoples to vastly expand their hunting grounds. This larger prey also enabled support of a larger group of people over a longer period of time. This increase in the ability to support population led to both population growth and expansion.

[ citation needed ] Torres Strait Islander boats [ edit ] Torres Strait Islander people, another Indigenous Australian group of peoples (who are not Aboriginal), used a different type of boat – a double outrigger , unique to their area and probably introduced from Papuan communities and later modified. It was about 14 metres (46 ft) long, with two bamboo masts and sails made of pandanus -mat. They could sail as far as 80 kilometres (50 mi) and carry up to twelve people.

[ 10 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Clark, Marshall; May, Sally K., eds. (2013).

Macassan History and Heritage: Journeys, Encounters and Influences (PDF) . ANU Press.

ISBN 9781922144966 . Retrieved 20 January 2020 .

^ "Djalu' Gurruwiwi" (PDF) . Buku-Larrnggay Mulka Centre. 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 January 2020 . Retrieved 19 January 2020 – via Hollow Logs Didgeridoos.

^ a b c d Mitchell 2005 ^ a b c Thomas 1905, ^ Bellwood and Hiscock 2005 ^ http://www.plantnames.unimelb.edu.au/Sorting/Polyscias.html Sorting Polyscias names ^ http://www.woodsolutions.com.au/Wood-Species/satin-sycamore Archived 10 July 2015 at the Wayback Machine Satin sycamore, also known as Ceratopetalum succirubrum ^ Thompson 1905 ^ Worsley 1955, ^ Korff, Jens (5 November 2019).

"Torres Strait Islander culture" .

Creative Spirits . Retrieved 20 January 2020 .

Bellwood; Hiscock (2005). Chris Scarre (ed.).

The Human Past: World Prehistory and the Development of Human Societies . pp.

275– 300.

Thomas, N.W. (January–June 1905).

"Australian Canoes and Rafts" .

The Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland .

35 . Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland: 56– 79.

doi : 10.2307/2843117 .

JSTOR 2843117 .

Mitchell, Scott. "Dugongs and Dugouts, Sharptacks and Shellbacks: Macassan Contact and Aboriginal Marine Hunting on the Cobourg Peninsula, Northwestern Arnhem Land".

Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association Bulletin .

2 : 181– 191.

Thompson, Donald (July–December 1934). "The Dugong Hunters of Cape York".

Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland .

64 . Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland: 237– 263.

doi : 10.2307/2843809 .

JSTOR 2843809 .

Worsley, Peter (April 1955). "Early Asian Contacts with Australia".

Past and Present (7): 1– 11.

doi : 10.1093/past/7.1.1 .

v t e Culture of indigenous Oceania List of resources about traditional arts and culture of Oceania Art Ahu Australia Austronesia Cook Islands kapa (Hawaiʻi) Lei magimagi moai New Zealand Māori nguzu nguzu Oceania Papua New Guinea reimiro tā moko tabua taʻovala tapa ["masi" (Fiji), "ngatu" (Tonga), "siapo" (Sāmoa), " ʻuha" (Rotuma)] tattoo tēfui tivaevae Broad culture areca nut "yaqona" (Fiji), or "sakau" (Pohnpei) Kava culture Lapita Māori Polynesia Sāmoa 'ava ceremony Wood carving Geo-specific, general Australia Australian Aboriginal astronomy ) Austronesia Caroline Islands , - Pwo Chatham Islands Cook Islands Easter Island Fiji Lau Islands traditions and ceremonies Guam Lomilomi massage Kiribati French Polynesia's Marquesas Islands Federated States of Micronesia Nauru New Caledonia New Zealand Māori Niue Norfolk Island Palau Papua New Guinea Pitcairn Islands Sāmoa Solomon Islands Tonga Torres Strait Islands Tuvalu Vanuatu Wallis and Futuna Polynesian Navigation Micronesian Navigation Marshall Islands Stick charts of Yap navigation Weriyeng navigation school Canoes Aboriginal dugout Alingano Maisu Bangka Drua Dugout (boat) Hōkūleʻa Kaep Karakoa Māori migration Outrigger Paopao (Tuvalu) Paraw Polynesian sailing Proa Vinta Waka list Walap Dance ʻAparima cibi fara fire dancing firewalking haka hivinau hula kailao kapa haka Kiribati meke 'ote'a pa'o'a poi Rotuma siva Tahiti tāmūrē tautoga Tonga Tuvalu 'upa'upa Festivals Australia Garma Festival Hawaiʻi Aloha Festivals Merrie Monarch Festival World Invitational Hula Festival Fiji New Zealand Pasifika Festival Te Matatini Pacific Community Festival of Pacific Arts Papua New Guinea Languages by area v t e Languages of Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna by category Languages of Oceania Literature v t e Literature of Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna Music Austral Islands (French Polynesia) Australia Austronesia Cook Islands Easter Island Fiji Guam Kiribati Lali Melanesia Micronesia Federated States of Micronesia Nauru New Caledonia New Zealand Māori Niue Northern Mariana Islands Palau Papua New Guinea Polynesia Sāmoa Slit drum Solomon Islands Tahiti Tokelau Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Wallis and Futuna Mythology Australian Aboriginal Fijian Mangarevan Maohi Māori Melanesian Menehune Micronesian Oceanian legendary creatures Polynesian Rapa Nui Samoan Tuvaluan Vanuatuan Research Asian American and Pacific Islander Policy Research Consortium Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies People Indigenous Australian Austronesian Sama-Bajau Chamorro Chatham Islander (Moriori or Rekohu) Fijian (iTaukei) Hawaiian Ilocano Igorot Ivatans Lumad Māori Marshallese Melanesian Micronesian Negrito Norfolk Islander Papuan Polynesian Indigenous Polynesian (Mā’ohi) Rapa Nui Rotuman Samoan (Tagata Māo‘i) Tagalog Tahitian Taiwanese aborigines Tokelauan Tongan Torres Strait Islander Visayans Yami Religion v t e Religion in Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna For other topics including Oceanian cinema , indigenous currency , dress , folklore and cuisine , see Category:Culture of Oceania .

v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aboriginal_dugout_canoe&oldid=1304009376 " Categories : Australian Aboriginal culture Indigenous boats Australian Aboriginal bushcraft History of Indigenous Australians Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Australian English from April 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from April 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2020 This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 11:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aboriginal dugout canoe 1 language Add topic

