Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In differential topology 2 In Riemannian geometry 3 In Lie group theory 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Vector flow Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Vector flow" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In mathematics , the vector flow refers to a set of closely related concepts of the flow determined by a vector field . These appear in a number of different contexts, including differential topology , Riemannian geometry and Lie group theory.

In differential topology [ edit ] Let V be a smooth vector field on a smooth manifold M . There is a unique maximal flow D → M whose infinitesimal generator is V . Here D ⊆ R × M is the flow domain . For each p ∈ M the map D p → M is the unique maximal integral curve of V starting at p .

A global flow is one whose flow domain is all of R × M . Global flows define smooth actions of R on M . A vector field is complete if it generates a global flow. Every smooth vector field on a compact manifold without boundary is complete.

In Riemannian geometry [ edit ] In Riemannian geometry , a vector flow can be thought of as a solution to the system of differential equations induced by a vector field.

[ 1 ] That is, if a (conservative) vector field is a map to the tangent space , it represents the tangent vectors to some function at each point. Splitting the tangent vectors into directional derivatives, one can solve the resulting system of differential equations to find the function. In this sense, the function is the flow and both induces and is induced by the vector field.

From a point, the rate of change of the i-th component with respect to the parametrization of the flow (“how much the flow has acted”) is described by the i-th component of the field. That is, if one parametrizes with L ‘length along the path of the flow,’ as one proceeds along the flow by dL the first position component changes as described by the first component of the vector field at the point one starts from, and likewise for all other components.

The exponential map exp : T p M → M is defined as exp( X ) = γ(1) where γ : I → M is the unique geodesic passing through p at 0 and whose tangent vector at 0 is X . Here I is the maximal open interval of R for which the geodesic is defined.

Let M be a pseudo-Riemannian manifold (or any manifold with an affine connection ) and let p be a point in M . Then for every V in T p M there exists a unique geodesic γ : I → M for which γ(0) = p and γ γ ˙ ˙ ( 0 ) = V .

{\displaystyle {\dot {\gamma }}(0)=V.} Let D p be the subset of T p M for which 1 lies in I .

In Lie group theory [ edit ] Every left-invariant vector field on a Lie group is complete. The integral curve starting at the identity is a one-parameter subgroup of G . There are one-to-one correspondences {one-parameter subgroups of G } ⇔ {left-invariant vector fields on G } ⇔ g = T e G .

Let G be a Lie group and g its Lie algebra . The exponential map is a map exp : g → G given by exp( X ) = γ(1) where γ is the integral curve starting at the identity in G generated by X .

The exponential map is smooth.

For a fixed X , the map t ↦ exp( tX ) is the one-parameter subgroup of G generated by X .

The exponential map restricts to a diffeomorphism from some neighborhood of 0 in g to a neighborhood of e in G .

The image of the exponential map always lies in the connected component of the identity in G .

See also [ edit ] Gradient vector flow – Computer vision framework References [ edit ] ^ Chen, Ricky T. Q.; Lipman, Yaron (2024-02-26), Flow Matching on General Geometries , arXiv : 2302.03660 , retrieved 2024-12-13 v t e Manifolds ( Glossary , List , Category ) Basic concepts Topological manifold Atlas Differentiable/Smooth manifold Differential structure Smooth atlas Submanifold Riemannian manifold Smooth map Submersion Pushforward Tangent space Differential form Vector field Main results (list) Atiyah–Singer index Darboux's De Rham's Frobenius Generalized Stokes Hopf–Rinow Noether's Sard's Whitney embedding Maps Curve Diffeomorphism Local Geodesic Exponential map in Lie theory Foliation Immersion Integral curve Lie derivative Section Submersion Types of manifolds Closed Collapsing Complete ( Almost ) Complex ( Almost ) Contact Fibered Finsler ( Almost ) Flat G-structure Hadamard Hermitian Hyperbolic Kähler Kenmotsu Lie group Lie algebra Manifold with boundary Nilmanifold Oriented Parallelizable Poisson Prime Quaternionic Hypercomplex ( Pseudo- , Sub- ) Riemannian Rizza Stein ( Almost ) Symplectic Tame Tensors Vectors Distribution Lie bracket Pushforward Tangent space bundle Torsion Vector field Vector flow Covectors Closed/Exact Covariant derivative Cotangent space bundle De Rham cohomology Differential form Vector-valued Exterior derivative Interior product Pullback Ricci curvature flow Riemann curvature tensor Tensor field density Volume form Wedge product Bundles Adjoint Affine Associated Cotangent Dual Fiber ( Co- ) Fibration Jet Lie algebra ( Stable ) Normal Principal Spinor Subbundle Tangent Tensor Vector Connections Affine Cartan Ehresmann Form Generalized Koszul Levi-Civita Principal Vector Parallel transport Related Classification of manifolds Gauge theory History Morse theory Moving frame Singularity theory Generalizations Banach manifold Diffeology Diffiety Fréchet manifold K-theory Orbifold Secondary calculus over commutative algebras Sheaf Stratifold Supermanifold Stratified space Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vector_flow&oldid=1285714534 " Categories : Geodesic (mathematics) Differential topology Lie groups Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from December 2024 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 15 April 2025, at 09:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vector flow Add languages Add topic

