Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Research Toggle Research subsection 1.1 Education 1.2 Second-generation immigrants 1.3 Refugees of war 1.4 Law enforcement 1.5 In sports 2 Cultural dissonance in popular culture 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Cultural dissonance 2 languages العربية Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sense of discord caused by a change in a cultural environment In sociology and cultural studies , cultural dissonance is a  sense of discord, disharmony, confusion, or conflict experienced by people in the midst of change in their cultural environment. The changes are often unexpected, unexplained or not understandable due to various types of cultural dynamics.

[ 1 ] Studies into cultural dissonance take on a wide socio-cultural scope of analysis that inquire into economics , politics , values , learning styles , cultural factors, such as language , tradition , ethnicity , cultural heritage , cultural history , educational formats, classroom design, and even socio-cultural issues such as ethnocentrism , racism and their respective historical legacies in the cultures.

Research [ edit ] Research topics in cultural dissonance tend to be interdisciplinary drawing from a wide range of disciplines and applying the findings to equally diverse fields and industries.

Education [ edit ] Winifred L. Macdonald concluded in her thesis that, "... shared markers of language and ethnicity were not sufficient to ensure that the cultural differences in education systems were not experienced by the families." 
Macdonald also observed that cultural dissonance is sometimes said to inhibit socio-cultural adaptation.

[ 1 ] Susan Black, an education research consultant, wrote an article in the American School Board Journal of the National School Board Association that summarized some of the actions recommended by some researchers in education-related cultural dissonance. The recommendations for educators included: Recognize ethnocentrism Know and understand the student's cultural heritage Understand social, economic and political issues and values in different cultures Adopt the attitude that students—all students—can learn Create genuinely caring classrooms where all students are appreciated and accepted.

Other general findings include: Geneva Gay (University of Washington in Seattle, Washington), proposed that differences can erupt into cultural clashes Researchers at the Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory notes that many anecdotal case studies show how culturally responsive practices improve students' behavior and achievement.

[ 2 ] Second-generation immigrants [ edit ] In their book Children of Immigration , Carola and Marcelo Suárez-Orozco discuss dissonance as it relates to Latinos in the United States.

[ 3 ] Suarez Orozco found that second-generation Hispanics face more acute forms of cultural dissonance than their first generation parents. They also noticed that second-generation individuals also face "special difficulties" that lead to "three general patterns of adjustment" attempts to synthesize two cultural traditions passing as a member of the dominant group developing of defensive identity such as gang membership Refugees of war [ edit ] Suárez-Orozco also compared the experience of exiles from Cuba being reunited with family members with the "...alienated refugees from war-torn Central America..." as they worked through their own adjustment issues, and concluded that Central Americans had to deal with more cultural dissonance than their Cuban counterparts.

Law enforcement [ edit ] Larry A. Gould wrote a paper for Northern Arizona University : his research reports on the link between feelings of spirituality & how Navajo police officers tend to enforce European-based law. Previous research suggests that a link exists between the officers' depth of feeling of spirituality & the officers' attitude toward the effectiveness traditional methods of social control; however, this research goes a step further & examines the impact of cultural dissonance on the stressors faced by Navajo police officers. The enforcement behavior of the Navajo officers was used as a proxy for the intensity of their feelings concerning the usefulness of traditional vs European-based forces of social control; the underlying assumption being tested is that self-determination is not only a state of law but a state of psychological being. A snowball method of sample development was used to select officers for intensive interviews. The findings suggest that the officers' feeling of spiritual connectedness to his/her culture is inversely related to the strictness of the enforcement of European-based laws. In other words, the more spiritual the officer, the less likely the officer is to rely solely on European-based laws, & the greater the reliance on other methods of problems solving. The finding also suggest that in addition to the stressors normally encounter by all police officers, Navajo officers faced additional stressors that are specific to indigenous officers policing in indigenous communities.

— Gould [ 4 ] In sports [ edit ] Tracy Taylor wrote a paper for the Journal of Sport and Social Issues . In it she wrote: ...This research investigates issues of cultural diversity & inclusiveness in women's netball in Australia using the rhetoric of exclusion. Women & girls from culturally diverse backgrounds spoke of reinforced difference & cultural assimilation in their netball experiences. Women born in other English-speaking countries recalled feelings of inclusion & limited cultural dissonance & indicated that netball helped them feel as part of their new community & gain social capital via participation. Although experiences of explicit exclusion or racial discrimination were virtually nonreported, some women felt a strong sense of cultural conformity to Anglo-centric expectations of behavior. The women's stories & experiences suggest that women from culturally diverse backgrounds have found few opportunities to express their cultural distinctiveness through mainstream Australian sports such as netball. The conclusion reached after this examination is that the rhetoric of exclusion is pervasive in Australian netball & unlikely to change in the near future.

— Taylor [ 5 ] Cultural dissonance in popular culture [ edit ] Side 2 of the Firesign Theatre 's 1968 album, Waiting for the Electrician or Someone Like Him , features a humorous 18-minute radio drama of a traveler experiencing cultural dissonance on his arrival in a foreign country. For example, the traveler struggles to communicate his wish to send a telegram, only to be informed that yes, his telegram has been sent, at considerable cost, and that he will be receiving it in about an hour.

See also [ edit ] Anomie Cognitive dissonance Culture Culture shock Propaganda Gaslighting References [ edit ] ^ a b Macdonald, Winifred Lilian (April 1998).

English speaking migrant children in educational and cultural transition (PDF) (PhD thesis). Curtin University of Technology.

hdl : 20.500.11937/1322 .

^ Black, Susan. American School Board Journal; Jan 2006, Vol. 193 Issue 1, p34-36, 3p ^ Carola and Marcelo Suárez-Orozco, "Children of Immigration" , Harvard University Press, 2001 ^ Gould, Larry A. (April 2002). "Indigenous people policing indigenous people: the potential psychological and cultural costs".

The Social Science Journal .

39 (2): 171– 178.

doi : 10.1016/S0362-3319(02)00161-1 .

ISSN 0362-3319 .

^ Taylor, Tracy (November 2004).

"The Rhetoric of Exclusion: Perspectives of Cultural Diversity in Australian Netball" (PDF) .

Journal of Sport and Social Issues .

28 (4): 453– 476.

doi : 10.1177/0193723504269881 .

ISSN 0193-7235 .

Further reading [ edit ] Kane, Julie (January 1997).

"Mapping the future" .

Virginia Tech Research (Book review). Blacksburg, Virginia: Virginia Tech. Archived from the original on 2016-10-10.

Waggoner, Raymond W. (July 1970). "The Presidential Address: Cultural Dissonance and Psychiatry".

American Journal of Psychiatry .

127 (1): 1– 8.

doi : 10.1176/ajp.127.1.1 .

ISSN 0002-953X .

"Practice Imperfect: Reflections on a Career in Social Work by Rae Tucker Rambally" .

The Caribbean Journal of Social Work (Book review).

2 . Association of Caribbean Social Work Educators: 148– 152. July 2003.

ISSN 0799-1215 . Archived from the original on 2005-04-09.

White, Shane; White, Graham (July 2001).

"Hearing Slavery: Recovering the role of sound in African American slave culture" .

Common-Place .

1 (4). Archived from the original on 2002-06-23.

Suárez-Orozco, Carola; Suárez-Orozco, Marcelo (1995). "Migration: Generational discontinuities and the making of Latino identities".

Ethnic identity: Creation, conflict, and accommodation .

3 . Walnut Creek, California: Altamira Press: 321– 347.

Hedican, Edward J. (1991). "On the ethno-politics of Canadian Native leadership and identity".

Ethnic Groups .

9 (1): 1– 15.

Montazer, Zahra (1997).

Immigrant youth: Strategies to manage cultural dissonance (Thesis). University of Calgary, Graduate Division of Educational Policy.

OCLC 911755835 .

Dean, Terry (February 1989).

"Multicultural classrooms, monocultural teachers" (PDF) .

College Composition and Communication .

40 (1). University of California Davis: 23– 37.

doi : 10.58680/ccc198911138 .

ISSN 0010-096X .

JSTOR 358178 .

v t e Culture Outline Sciences Cultural anthropology Cultural astronomy Cultural ecology Cultural geography Cultural neuroscience Cultural studies Culturology Culture theory Subfields Bioculture Cross-cultural studies Cross-cultural communication Cross-cultural leadership Cross-cultural psychiatry Cross-cultural psychology Cultural analytics Cultural economics Cultural entomology Cultural history Cultural mapping Cultural mediation Cultural psychology Cultural values Culturomics Intercultural learning Intercultural relations Philosophy of culture Popular culture studies Postcritique Semiotics of culture Sociology of culture Sound culture Theology of culture Transcultural nursing Types Constructed culture Dominant culture Folk culture High culture Individualistic culture Legal culture Microculture Official culture Political culture Civic Popular culture Low culture Media culture Recombinant culture Remix culture Trash culture Urban Primitive culture Resistance through culture Subculture Alternative culture Counterculture Fandom Far-right subcultures Underground culture Youth subculture list Super culture Vernacular culture Culture by location Aspects Acculturation Cultural appreciation Cultural appropriation Cultural area Cultural artifact Cultural baggage Cultural bias Cultural capital Cross-cultural Cultural communication Cultural conflict Cultural cringe Cultural dissonance Cultural emphasis Cultural framework Cultural heritage Destroyed Cultural icon Cultural identity Cultural industry Cultural invention Cultural landscape Cultural learning Cultural leveling Cultural memory Cultural pluralism Cultural practice Cultural property Cultural reproduction Cultural system Cultural technology Cultural universal Cultureme Enculturation High- and low-context cultures Interculturality Internet culture Manuscript culture Material culture Non-material culture Organizational culture Assessment culture Design culture Journalism culture Print culture Protoculture Relational mobility Safety culture Symbolic culture Technoculture Trans-cultural diffusion Transculturation Visual culture Politics Colonial mentality Consumer capitalism Cross cultural sensitivity Cultural assimilation Cultural attaché Cultural backwardness Cultural Bolshevism Cultural conservatism Cultural contracts Cultural deprivation Cultural diplomacy Cultural environmentalism Cultural exception Cultural feminism Cultural genocide Cultural globalization Cultural hegemony Cultural imperialism Cultural intelligence Cultural liberalism Cultural nationalism Cultural pessimism Cultural policy Cultural racism Cultural radicalism Cultural retention Cultural Revolution Cultural rights Cultural safety Cultural silence Cultural subsidy Cultural Zionism Culture change Culture minister Culture of fear Culture war Deculturalization Dominator culture Interculturalism Monoculturalism Multiculturalism Biculturalism Multiracial democracy Pluriculturalism Polyculturalism Transculturism Religions Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Cultural Christians Protestantism Role of Christianity in civilization Eastern Orthodoxy Mormonism Cultural Hindus Islam Cultural Muslims Judaism Sikhism Related Algorithmic culture Animal culture Archaeological culture Bennett scale Cannabis culture Circuit of culture Civilization Coffee culture Cringe culture Cross-cultural Cultural center Cultural competence Cultural critic Cultural determinism Cultural diversity Cultural evolutionism Cultural homogenization Cultural institution Cultural jet lag Cultural lag Cultural literacy Cultural mosaic Cultural movement Cultural mulatto Cultural probe Cultural relativism Cultural tourism Pop-culture Cultural translation Cultural turn Cultural sensibility Culture and menstruation Culture and positive psychology Culture and social cognition Culture gap Culture hero Culture industry Culture shock Culturgen Children's culture Culturalism Cyberculture Death and culture Disability culture Deaf culture Drinking culture Drug culture Eastern culture Emotions and culture Historical culture Intercultural communication Intercultural competence Languaculture Living things in culture Media culture Oppositional culture Participatory culture Permission culture Rape culture Remix culture Tea culture Transformation of culture Urban culture Welfare culture Western culture Youth culture Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cultural_dissonance&oldid=1239009856 " Categories : Cultural studies Cultural politics Social dynamics Majority–minority relations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description This page was last edited on 6 August 2024, at 21:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cultural dissonance 2 languages Add topic

