Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early years and anti-fascist resistance 2 Republican career 3 Legacy 4 Electoral history 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Ugo La Malfa 9 languages Deutsch Español Français Italiano Latina مصرى Piemontèis Polski Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian politician (1903–1979) Ugo La Malfa La Malfa in the early 1960s Deputy Prime Minister of Italy In office 21 March 1979 – 26 March 1979 Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti Preceded by Himself Succeeded by Arnaldo Forlani In office 23 November 1974 – 12 February 1976 Prime Minister Aldo Moro Preceded by Mario Tanassi Succeeded by Himself Secretary of the Italian Republican Party In office April 1965 – February 1975 Preceded by Oddo Biasini Succeeded by Oddo Biasini Ministerial offices Minister of Budget In office 21 March 1979 – 26 March 1979 Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti Preceded by Tommaso Morlino Succeeded by Bruno Visentini In office 22 February 1962 – 21 June 1963 Prime Minister Amintore Fanfani Preceded by Giuseppe Pella Succeeded by Giuseppe Medici Minister of Treasury In office 8 July 1973 – 15 March 1974 Prime Minister Mariano Rumor Preceded by Giovanni Malagodi Succeeded by Emilio Colombo Minister of Transports In office 17 June 1945 – 8 December 1945 Prime Minister Ferruccio Parri Preceded by Francesco Cerabona Succeeded by Riccardo Lombardi Parliamentary offices Member of the Chamber of Deputies In office 8 May 1948 – 26 March 1979 Constituency Bologna (1948–1972) Rome (1972–1979) Member of the Constituent Assembly In office 25 June 1946 – 31 January 1948 Constituency Italy at-large Personal details Born 16 May 1903 Palermo , Italy Died 26 March 1979 (aged 75) Rome , Italy Political party PdA (1942–1946) CDR (1946) PRI (1946–1979) Children Giorgio Residence(s) Rome, Italy Alma mater Ca' Foscari University of Venice Profession Politics Journalist Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e Ugo La Malfa (16 May 1903 – 26 March 1979) was an Italian politician and an important leader of the Italian Republican Party ( Partito Repubblicano Italiano ; PRI).

Early years and anti-fascist resistance [ edit ] La Malfa was born in Palermo , Sicily . After completing his secondary schooling, he enrolled in the Ca' Foscari University of Venice in the Department of Diplomatic Sciences with professors Silvio Trentin and Gino Luzzatto .

During his years at the university, he had contacts within the republican movement of Treviso and other anti-fascist groups. In 1924, he moved to Rome and participated in the foundation of the Goliardic Union for Freedom. On 14 June 1925, he participated in the first conference of the National Democratic Union, founded by Giovanni Amendola . The movement was later declared illegal under Mussolini's fascist government. In 1926, he graduated with a thesis dealing sharply with human rights . During his military service, he was transferred to Sardinia to disrupt the anti-fascist publication Pietre , on which he worked. By 1928, he was among those arrested following the 12 April bombing in the Fiera di Milano for allegedly planning to assassinate Italian King Victor Emmanuel III , only to be interrogated and released.

In 1929, he took a job editing the Treccani Encyclopaedia , working under the direction of the liberal philosopher Ugo Spirito . At the request of Raffaele Mattioli , he took a job with Mattioli's Italian Commercial Bank in 1933, of which he became director in 1938. During these years, he showed his expertise in both economics and leadership. There, he forged relations between anti-fascist groups to build a web that formed the Partito d'Azione , over which he presided as a founder.  On 1 January 1943, La Malfa and the lawyer Adolfo Tino succeeded in publishing the first issue of their clandestine publication, L'Italia Libera . Later that year, La Malfa fled Italy to escape arrest, travelling to Switzerland, where he had contacts with a British Special Operations Executive representative. With these, he tried to organize a trip to London to use his influence at the Foreign Office. He tried to prevent the Allied invasion of Italy and to obtain a negotiated Italian retreat from the war.

[ 1 ] Later, he returned to Rome to participate in the resistance movement with the Partito d'Azione and the Comitato di Liberazione Nazionale .

Republican career [ edit ] In 1945, under the reconstruction government of Ferruccio Parri , La Malfa assumed the role of Minister of Transportation. In the following government, under Alcide De Gasperi , he was Minister of Reconstruction, a position later renamed Minister of International Commerce. In February 1946, the first conference of the Partito d'Azione was held, during which Emilio Lussu prevailed in determining party philosophy, and La Malfa and Parri left the party. In March, he participated in the constitution of the Republican Democratic Concentration , which supported the republican referendum in June and contested the related general election. La Malfa and Parri were elected to the Constituent Assembly of Italy , and with the encouragement of Randolfo Pacciardi , they joined the Italian Republican Party, commonly known as the PRI.

He was designated to represent Italy at the International Monetary Fund in 1947 and was named vice president the following year. Meanwhile, with Giulio Andrea Belloni and Oronzo Reale , he assumed the temporary role of party secretary . Reelected to the parliament in 1948, and confirmed in the subsequent legislature, he held numerous positions, including as a "minister without portfolio" charged with reorganizing the Institute for Industrial Reconstruction (IRI), before he was appointed Minister of Foreign Trade in 1951. His work on liberalizing the Italian economy and lowering import tariffs was fundamental to the "economic miracle." In 1952, he proposed, without success, a "constituent program" between the secular parties. In 1956, while maintaining the Republican Party's autonomy from Marxist economic theories and its position on the left of the political spectrum, he favoured the unification of the three major socialist schools to make the divide between his party and theirs more comprehensible.

La Malfa in the early 1960s After the Republicans withdrew support for the government in 1957, Randolfo Pacciardi left as party director.  La Malfa assumed direction of the party's newspaper, La Voce Repubblicana , in 1959. In 1962, he was named Minister of the Budget in the first center-left government under Amintore Fanfani , following the socialist abstention.  In May, he introduced the Nota Aggiuntiva , in which he supplied a general vision of the state of the Italian economy, including the inequalities which characterized it, and delineated the instruments and objects of their regime. Though criticized for his plan by the Confindustria , the Italian employers' union, he decided to nationalize the electricity industry. On the occasion of the 29th conference of the Republican Party, in March 1965, he was elected party secretary. The following year, he opened a dialogue with the help of his old friend Giorgio Amendola , son of Giovanni Amendola , between the republicans and communists, inviting them to leave behind their old orthodoxy and help develop a more pragmatic approach.

During the tumultuous 1970s, the Republican Party played a small but vital role in determining the government of Italy and maintaining continuity. Following the fall of Mariano Rumor 's third government in 1970, La Malfa refused the invitation of incoming Prime Minister Emilio Colombo to take the role of Minister of the Treasury. For him, the government was not able to delineate a strategic plan for financing reforms with their education, health, and transportation services, and Colombo only lasted one year on the job. La Malfa pulled his party out of the subsequent Giulio Andreotti government over the issue of state control of cable television [1] . Asked again in 1973 by Mariano Rumor's fourth government, he accepted the Minister of the Treasury job. In that position, he blocked the request to grant increased emergency financing to Finambro, a bank owned by Michele Sindona , opening the door to the collapse of Sindona's banking empire and his eventual indictment. He resigned in February over fiscal policy disagreements with the Minister of the Budget, pulling the PRI's support for that government and causing its collapse. That December, he was named deputy Prime Minister in the fourth government of his friend Aldo Moro , and in 1975, he assumed the presidency of the Republican Party with Oddo Biasini replacing him as secretary.

The last years of his life were among his most productive. Upon defeating resistance from left-wing republicans in 1976, La Malfa brought the party into the pan-European federation, which later became the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party . In 1978, his action determined Italy's decision to join the European Monetary System . Following the kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro, La Malfa gave a tearful and memorable speech in the Chamber of Deputies condemning terrorism and the Red Brigades . Though nominated by President Sandro Pertini as Prime Minister in early 1979, the first secular politician to reach this stage, he could not form a government and later became Deputy Prime Minister and then Minister of the Budget in Giulio Andreotti's second government.

On 24 March 1979, he suffered a cerebral haemorrhage and died two days later in Rome.

Legacy [ edit ] For many, La Malfa was "the needle" that sewed the Italian republic together and kept it from coming undone, especially because of his role as a peacemaker between contrasting parties. He understood the futility and irresponsibility of governing without the communists, who held upwards of one-third of the seats in parliament. His economic principles, though they often appeared unrealistic and visionary, such as a common European monetary system, were revolutionary and helped make Italy second in economic growth only to West Germany for many years. His commitment to infrastructure within the Mezzogiorno has aided commerce for fifty years.

In Rome, Piazzale Romolo e Remo was renamed Piazzale Ugo La Malfa, and his hometown of Palermo was named Via Ugo La Malfa in his honour.

His son Giorgio La Malfa is president of the PRI and was Minister for European Affairs in Italy until 2006.

Electoral history [ edit ] Election House Constituency Party Votes Result 1946 Constituent Assembly Italy at-large PRI – [ a ] Y Elected 1948 Chamber of Deputies Bologna–Ferrara–Ravenna–Forlì PRI 11,059 Y Elected 1953 Chamber of Deputies Bologna–Ferrara–Ravenna–Forlì PRI 9,197 Y Elected 1958 Chamber of Deputies Bologna–Ferrara–Ravenna–Forlì PRI 10,457 Y Elected 1963 Chamber of Deputies Bologna–Ferrara–Ravenna–Forlì PRI 18,100 Y Elected 1968 Chamber of Deputies Bologna–Ferrara–Ravenna–Forlì PRI 13,544 Y Elected 1972 Chamber of Deputies Rome–Viterbo–Latina–Frosinone PRI 33,446 Y Elected 1976 Chamber of Deputies Rome–Viterbo–Latina–Frosinone PRI 22,159 Y Elected ^ Elected in a closed list proportional representation system.

See also [ edit ] Italian Republican Party Notes [ edit ] Paolo Soddu, Ugo La Malfa. Il riformista moderno , Carocci, Roma 2008.

References [ edit ] ^ Mireno Berrettini, La Gran Bretagna e l’Antifascismo italiano. Diplomazia clandestina, Intelligence, Operazioni Speciali (1940-1943), Firenze, 2010 External links [ edit ] Official site of the Ugo La Malfa Foundation v t e Deputy prime ministers of Italy Kingdom of Italy Togliatti Togliatti Rodinò Nenni Brosio Italian Republic Einaudi Pacciardi Saragat Piccioni Porzio Piccioni Saragat Pella Segni Piccioni Nenni De Martino Taviani De Martino Tanassi La Malfa La Malfa Forlani Amato De Michelis Martelli Maroni Tatarella Veltroni Mattarella Fini Follini Tremonti D'Alema Rutelli Alfano Salvini Di Maio Tajani Salvini v t e Rumor IV Cabinet (1973–74) Corona Ripamonti Lupis Coppo Donat-Cattin Toros Gioia Bucalossi Gava Moro Taviani Zagari Giolitti Colombo La Malfa Tanassi Malfatti Lauricella Ferrari Aggradi Preti Togni De Mita Gui Matteotti Pieraccini Gullotti Bertoldi Signorello v t e Andreotti V Cabinet (March–August 1979) Di Giesi Forlani Rognoni Morlino La Malfa / Visentini Malfatti Pandolfi Ruffini Spadolini Compagna Marcora Preti Colombo Nicolazzi Anselmi Preti (interim) Bisaglia Scotti Antoniozzi Ariosto Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Vatican Academics CiNii People Italian People Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ugo_La_Malfa&oldid=1296030783 " Categories : 1903 births 1979 deaths Politicians from Palermo Action Party (Italy) politicians Republican Democratic Concentration politicians Italian Republican Party politicians Ministers of transport of Italy Members of the National Council (Italy) Members of the Constituent Assembly of Italy Deputies of Legislature I of Italy Deputies of Legislature II of Italy Deputies of Legislature III of Italy Deputies of Legislature IV of Italy Deputies of Legislature V of Italy Deputies of Legislature VI of Italy Deputies of Legislature VII of Italy Italian anti-fascists Deputy prime ministers of Italy Exiled Italian politicians Italian resistance movement members Burials at Campo Verano Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2021 This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 10:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ugo La Malfa 9 languages Add topic

