Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Production 2 Examples 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Oligopeptide 17 languages العربية বাংলা Bosanski Čeština Deutsch Español 한국어 Italiano Қазақша Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Slovenčina Suomi Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Peptide consisting of two to twenty amino acids A tripeptide (example Val - Gly - Ala ) with green marked amino end ( L-Valine ) and blue marked carboxyl end ( L-Alanine ) A tetrapeptide (example Val - Gly - Ser - Ala ) with green marked amino end ( L-valine ) and blue marked carboxyl end ( L-alanine ) An oligopeptide ( oligo- , "a few"), is a peptide consisting of two to twenty amino acids , including dipeptides , tripeptides , tetrapeptides , and other polypeptides. Some of the major classes of naturally occurring oligopeptides include aeruginosins , cyanopeptolins , microcystins , microviridins , microginins , anabaenopeptins , and cyclamides . Microcystins are best studied because of their potential toxicity impact in drinking water.

[ 1 ] A review of some oligopeptides found that the largest class are the cyanopeptolins (40.1%), followed by microcystins (13.4%).

[ 2 ] Production [ edit ] Oligopeptide classes are produced by nonribosomal peptides synthases (NRPS), except cyclamides and microviridins are synthesized through ribosomic pathways.

[ 3 ] Examples [ edit ] Examples of oligopeptides include: [ 4 ] Amanitins - Cyclic peptides taken from carpophores of several different mushroom species. They are potent inhibitors of RNA polymerases in most eukaryotic species, the prevent the production of mRNA and protein synthesis. These peptides are important in the study of transcription. Alpha-amanitin is the main toxin from the species Amanita phalloides , poisonous if ingested by humans or animals.

Antipain - An oligopeptide produced by various bacteria which acts as a protease inhibitor.

Ceruletide - A specific decapeptide found in the skin of Hyla caerulea , the Australian green tree frog . Ceruletide has very much in common with regards to action and composition to cholecystokinin . It stimulates gastric, biliary, and pancreatic secretion; and certain smooth muscle . It is used to induce pancreatitis in experimental animal models.

Glutathione - A tripeptide with many roles in cells. It conjugates to drugs to make them more soluble for excretion, is a cofactor for some enzymes, is involved in protein disulfide bond rearrangement and reduces peroxides.

Leupeptins - A group of acylated oligopeptides produced by Actinomycetes that function as protease inhibitors. They have been known to inhibit to varying degrees trypsin , plasmin , kallikreins , papain and the cathepsins .

Netropsin - A basic oligopeptide isolated from Streptomyces netropsis . It is cytotoxic and its strong, specific binding to A-T areas of DNA is useful to genetics research.

Pepstatins - N -acylated oligopeptides isolated from culture filtrates of Actinomycetes, which act specifically to inhibit acid proteases such as pepsin and renin.

Peptide T - N -( N -( N (2)-( N -( N -( N -( N - D -Alanyl L -seryl)- L -threonyl)- L -threonyl) L -threonyl)- L -asparaginyl)- L -tyrosyl) L -threonine. Octapeptide sharing sequence homology with HIV envelope protein gp120. It may be useful as antiviral agent in AIDS therapy. The core pentapeptide sequence, TTNYT, consisting of amino acids 4-8 in peptide T, is the HIV envelope sequence required for attachment to the CD4 receptor.

Phalloidin - A very toxic polypeptide isolated mainly from Amanita phalloides (Agaricaceae) or death cap; causes fatal liver, kidney and CNS damage in mushroom poisoning; used in the study of liver damage.

Teprotide - A man-made nonapeptide (Pyr-Trp-Pro-Arg-Pro-Gln-Ile-Pro-Pro) which is exactly the same as the peptide from the venom of the snake, Bothrops jararaca. It inhibits kininase II and angiotensin I and has been proposed as an antihypertensive agent.

Tuftsin - N (2)-((1-( N (2)- L -Threonyl)- L -lysyl)- L -prolyl)- L -arginine. A tetrapeptide manufactured in the spleen by enzymatic cleavage of a leukophilic gamma-globulin. It stimulates the phagocytic activity of blood polymorphonuclear leukocytes and neutrophils in particular. The peptide is located in the Fd fragment of the gamma-globulin molecule.

See also [ edit ] Micropeptide Oligoester Oligomer Oligopeptidase Peptide synthesis Protease References [ edit ] ^ Martin Welker; Hans Von Döhren (2006).

"Cyanobacterial peptides – Nature's own combinatorial biosynthesis" .

FEMS Microbiology Reviews .

30 (4): 530– 563.

doi : 10.1111/j.1574-6976.2006.00022.x .

PMID 16774586 .

^ George E. Chlipala; Shunyan Mo; Jimmy Orjala (2011).

"Chemodiversity in Freshwater and Terrestrial Cyanobacteria – a Source for Drug Discovery" .

Curr Drug Targets .

12 (11): 1654– 73.

doi : 10.2174/138945011798109455 .

PMC 3244969 .

PMID 21561419 .

^ Ramsy Agha; Samuel Cirés; Lars Wörmer; Antonio Quesada (2013).

"Limited Stability of Microcystins in Oligopeptide Compositions of Microcystis aeruginosa (Cyanobacteria): Implications in the Definition of Chemotypes" .

Toxins .

5 (6): 1089– 1104.

doi : 10.3390/toxins5061089 .

PMC 3717771 .

PMID 23744054 .

^ Argos, Patrick.

"An Investigation of Oligopeptides Linking Domains in Protein Tertiary Structures and Possible Candidates for General Gene Fusion" (PDF) . European Molecular Biology Laboratory. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 July 2014 . Retrieved 28 July 2014 .

External links [ edit ] Look up oligopeptide in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Structural Biochemistry/Proteins/Amino Acids (Wikibooks) Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Oligopeptide&oldid=1232211103 " Category : Peptides Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 July 2024, at 15:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Oligopeptide 17 languages Add topic

