Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Research 2 In popular culture 3 Works 4 Awards 5 Notes 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Richard E. Nisbett 9 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی 한국어 مصرى Norsk bokmål Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American psychologist (born 1941) Richard E. Nisbett Nisbett in 2014 Born ( 1941-06-01 ) June 1, 1941 (age 84) Littlefield, Texas , U.S.

Alma mater Columbia University Spouse Sarah Isaacs Children 2 Awards Donald T. Campbell Award from American Psychological Association (1982), Guggenheim Fellowship (2002) Scientific career Fields Social psychology Institutions University of Michigan Thesis Taste, deprivation and weight determinants of eating behavior (1966) Doctoral advisor Stanley Schachter Richard Eugene Nisbett (born June 1, 1941) [ 1 ] is an American social psychologist and writer. He is the Theodore M. Newcomb Distinguished Professor of social psychology and co-director of the Culture and Cognition program at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor . Nisbett's research interests are in social cognition, culture, social class, and aging. He received his Ph.D. from Columbia University , where his advisor was Stanley Schachter , whose other students at that time included Lee Ross and Judith Rodin .

Research [ edit ] Perhaps his most influential publication is "Telling more than we can know: Verbal reports on mental processes" (with T. D. Wilson , 1977, Psychological Review , 84, 231–259), one of the most often cited psychology articles published, with over 13,000 citations.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] This article was the first comprehensive, empirically based argument that a variety of mental processes responsible for preferences, choices, and emotions are inaccessible to conscious awareness. Nisbett and Wilson contended that introspective reports can provide only an account of "what people think about how they think," but not "how they really think." [ citation needed ] Some cognitive psychologists disputed this claim, with Ericsson and Simon (1980) offering an alternative perspective.

[ 4 ] Nisbett's book The Geography of Thought: How Asians and Westerners Think Differently... And Why (Free Press; 2003) contends that "human cognition is not everywhere the same," that Asians and Westerners "have maintained very different systems of thought for thousands of years," [ 5 ] and that these differences are scientifically measurable.
Nisbett's book Intelligence and How to Get It: Why Schools and Cultures Count (2009) argues that environmental factors dominate genetic factors in determining intelligence. The book received extensive favorable attention in the press and from some fellow academics; [ 6 ] for example, University of Pennsylvania psychologist Daniel Osherson wrote that the book was a "hugely important analysis of the determinants of IQ".  On the other hand, more critical reviewers such as Harvard's James J. Lee argued that the book failed to grapple with the strongest evidence for genetic factors in individual and group intelligence differences.

[ 7 ] With Edward E. Jones , he named the actor–observer bias , the phenomenon where people acting and people observing use different explanations for why a behavior occurs.

[ 8 ] This is an important concept in attribution theory , and refers to the tendency to attribute one's own behaviour to situational factors while attributing other people's behaviour to their disposition. Jones and Nisbett's own explanation for this was that our attention is focused on the situation when we are actors, but on the person when we are observers, although other explanations have been advanced for the actor-observer bias.

[ citation needed ] In popular culture [ edit ] In an interview with The New York Times , Canadian journalist Malcolm Gladwell said, "The most influential thinker, in my life, has been the psychologist Richard Nisbett. He basically gave me my view of the world." [ 9 ] Works [ edit ] Nisbett, R. and T. Wilson (1977). "Telling more than we can know: Verbal reports on mental processes." Psychological Review 84(3): 231–259.

Ross, L and Nisbett, R.E.

The Person and the Situation . McGraw Hill, 1991. Reissued with new foreword by Malcolm Gladwell and afterword by the authors, 2011 Culture of Honor: The Psychology of Violence in the South (Westview Press, 1996) The Geography of Thought (Free Press, 2003) ISBN 978-0743216463 Intelligence and How to Get It: Why Schools and Cultures Count (Norton, 2009) Mindware: Tools for Smart Thinking (FSG, 2015) Awards [ edit ] Donald T. Campbell Award for Distinguished Research in Social Psychology, awarded by the Society for Personality and Social Psychology , 1982.

Award for Distinguished Scientific Contributions to Psychology , American Psychological Association , 1991.

Fellow, American Academy of Arts and Sciences , 1992.

Distinguished Senior Scientist Award, Society for Experimental Social Psychology , 1995 Wei Lun Visiting professor of psychology, Chinese University of Hong Kong, 1995.

William James Fellow Award for Distinguished Scientific Achievements, American Psychological Society , 1996.

Elected to the National Academy of Sciences , 2002 Oswald-Külpe-Award of the University of Würzburg , Germany, 2007 [ 10 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Deutsche Nationalbibliothek "Nisbett, Richard E." ^ Nisbett, Richard E.; Wilson, Timothy D. (1977).

"Telling more than we can know: Verbal reports on mental processes" (PDF) .

Psychological Review .

84 (3): 231– 59.

doi : 10.1037/0033-295X.84.3.231 .

hdl : 2027.42/92167 .

S2CID 7742203 .

^ "Google Scholar" .

scholar.google.com . Retrieved September 8, 2019 .

Cited by 13531 ^ Ericsson, K. Anders; Simon, Herbert A. (1980). "Verbal reports as data".

Psychological Review .

87 (3): 215– 51.

doi : 10.1037/0033-295X.87.3.215 .

^ Nisbett 2003, p. xvi ^ Holt, Jim (March 27, 2009).

"Get Smart" .

The New York Times .

^ Lee, James J. (2010). "Review of intelligence and how to get it: Why schools and cultures count, R.E. Nisbett, Norton, New York, NY".

Personality and Individual Differences .

48 (2): 247– 55.

doi : 10.1016/j.paid.2009.09.015 .

^ "Actor-observer difference" .

Oxford Reference .

^ "Malcolm Gladwell: By the Book" .

The New York Times . October 3, 2013.

^ Brief Biography for Richard E. Nisbett , University of Michigan faculty page External links [ edit ] Nisbett's homepage at the University of Michigan Nisbett's faculty profile (archived) The Edge Annual Question — 2006 Richard E. Nisbett publications indexed by Google Scholar Biography in Contemporary Authors (2009) v t e Psychology History Philosophy Portal Psychologist Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Methodologies Animal testing Archival research Behavior epigenetics Case study Content analysis Experiments Human subject research Interviews Neuroimaging Observation Psychophysics Qualitative research Quantitative research Self-report inventory Statistical surveys Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Psychologists Wilhelm Wundt William James Ivan Pavlov Sigmund Freud Edward Thorndike Carl Jung John B. Watson Clark L. Hull Kurt Lewin Jean Piaget Gordon Allport J. P. Guilford Carl Rogers Erik Erikson B. F. Skinner Donald O. Hebb Ernest Hilgard Harry Harlow Raymond Cattell Abraham Maslow Neal E. Miller Jerome Bruner Donald T. Campbell Hans Eysenck Herbert A. Simon David McClelland Leon Festinger George A. Miller Richard Lazarus Stanley Schachter Robert Zajonc Albert Bandura Roger Brown Endel Tulving Lawrence Kohlberg Noam Chomsky Ulric Neisser Jerome Kagan Walter Mischel Elliot Aronson Daniel Kahneman Paul Ekman Michael Posner Amos Tversky Bruce McEwen Larry Squire Richard E. Nisbett Martin Seligman Ed Diener Shelley E. Taylor John Anderson Ronald C. Kessler Joseph E. LeDoux Richard Davidson Susan Fiske Roy Baumeister Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Category Wiktionary definition Wiktionary category Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Wikibooks Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project Google Scholar MathSciNet People DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Richard_E._Nisbett&oldid=1300329463 " Categories : 1941 births 20th-century American psychologists American psychology writers 21st-century American psychologists Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Living people Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences People from Littlefield, Texas People involved in race and intelligence controversies American social psychologists Teachers College, Columbia University alumni University of Michigan faculty Writers from Texas APA Distinguished Scientific Award for an Early Career Contribution to Psychology recipients Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2023 Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 18:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Richard E. Nisbett 9 languages Add topic

