Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Agricultural law 12 languages العربية Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Italiano ქართული Lietuvių Nederlands Polski Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Law relates to agribusiness This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Agricultural law" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Spanish .

(March 2025) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Spanish Wikipedia article at [[:es:Derecho agrario]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|es|Derecho agrario}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Italian .

(March 2025) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Italian Wikipedia article at [[:it:Diritto agrario]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|it|Diritto agrario}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( March 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Agricultural law , sometimes referred to as Ag Law , deals with such legal issues as agricultural cooperatives , seed, water, fertilizer , pesticide use, agricultural finance, agricultural labour, agricultural marketing , agricultural insurance , farming rights, land tenure and tenancy system and law on Agricultural processing and rural industry. With implementation of modern technologies, issues including credit, intellectual property , trade and commerce related to agricultural products are dealt within the sphere of this law.

Simply put, agricultural law is the study of the special laws and regulations that apply to the production and sale of agricultural products.

[ 1 ] "Agricultural exceptionalism," i.e., the use of legal exceptions to protect the agricultural industry, is pervasive, worldwide.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Agriculture law is ancient, dating at least from the English Common law in the 17th century; Aldred's Case (1610) is an English land law and tort law case on nuisance, whereby a person has a cause of action when their immediate neighbor has a pigsty adjacent to their house.

[ 3 ] Ireland's parliament passed what might have been the first animal welfare legislation, An Act against Plowing by the Tayle, and pulling the Wooll off living Sheep , in 1635.

[ 4 ] American law schools and legal scholars first recognized agricultural law as a discipline in the 1940s when law schools at Yale , Harvard , Texas, and Iowa explored and initiated agricultural law courses.

[ 5 ] These early efforts were short-lived, however, and agricultural law as a distinct discipline did not resurface for three decades.  In 1979, a scholarly journal, The Agricultural Law Journal was initiated.

[ 6 ] In 1980, the American Agricultural Law Association was formed [ 7 ] and an advanced law degree program, the LL.M. Program in Agricultural Law was founded at the University of Arkansas School of Law .

[ 8 ] In 1981, a fifteen volume Agricultural Law Treatise was published [ 9 ] and in 1985, the first law school casebook, Agricultural Law: Cases and Materials was published by West Publishing.

[ 10 ] In recent years, agricultural law studies have expanded to incorporate a wider consideration of the impact of agricultural production, including issues of environmental law , sustainability, animal welfare, and food law and policy.

[ 11 ] Reflecting this expanded perspective, in 2009, the LL.M. Program in Agricultural Law at Arkansas changed its name to the LL.M Program in Agricultural and Food Law.  In 2010, the second law school textbook was published with the title, Food, Farming & Sustainability: Readings in Agricultural Law.

[ 12 ] And, in 2012, the American Association of Law Schools changed the name of its Agricultural Law section to Agricultural and Food Law. The emerging discipline of food law & policy traces its roots to the discipline of agricultural law as well as tradition food and drug law.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Adjusted Gross Revenue Insurance Agricultural Act of 1949 Agricultural Act of 1954 Agricultural district National Agricultural Law Center American Agricultural Law Association References [ edit ] ^ Schneider, Susan (2010).

"A Reconsideration of Agricultural Law" .

William & Mary Environmental Law and Policy Review . V. 34, Issue 3: 935– 963.

^ Skogstad, Grace (1998). "Ideas, Paradigms, and Institutions: Agricultural Exceptionalism in the European Union and the United States".

Governance .

11 (4): 463– 468.

doi : 10.1111/0952-1895.00082 .

^ Aldred's Case (1610) 9 Co Rep 57b; (1610) 77 ER 816, [1558–1774] All ER Rep 622.

^ Donnellan, Laura (9 January 2025).

"How Ireland produced the world's first animal anti-cruelty laws in 1635" .

RTE . Retrieved 12 March 2025 .

^ Hannah, Harold (1946). "Law and Agriculture".

Virginia Law Review .

32 (4): 781– 784.

doi : 10.2307/1068799 .

JSTOR 1068799 .

^ Hamilton, Neil (1990). "The Study of Agricultural Law in the United States".

Arkansas Law Review .

43 : 503– 515.

^ Schneider, Susan (2005). "Thoughts on Agricultural Law and the Role of the American Agricultural Law Association".

Drake Journal of Agricultural Law .

10 : 2– 10.

^ "LL.M. Program in Agricultural & Food Law" .

^ Harl, Neil (1985).

Agricultural Law . Matthew Bender.

^ Pedersen, Donald (1985).

Agricultural Law: Cases and Materials . West.

^ Schneider, Susan (2016).

Food, Farming, & Sustainability: Readings in Agricultural Law . Carolina Press.

^ Schneider, Susan (2010).

Food, Farming, and Sustainability: Readings in Agricultural Law (2nd ed. 2016) . Carolina Press.

^ Emily Broad Leib and, Baylen Linnekin (2014).

"Food Law & Policy: The Fertile Field's Origins & First Decade" .

Wisconsin Law Review .

2014 : 557. Archived from the original on 2021-04-19 . Retrieved 2017-03-12 .

External links [ edit ] Iowa State University's Center for Agricultural Law and Taxation LL.M. Program in Agricultural & Food Law , University of Arkansas School of Law Food Farming & Sustainability: Legal Resources Website Drake Agricultural Law Center Agricultural Law Information Partnership LLM in Food and Agriculture Law , Vermont Law and Graduate School v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Agricultural_law&oldid=1303226334 " Categories : Agricultural law Energy law Environmental law Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2017 All articles needing additional references Government and politics articles needing translation from Spanish Wikipedia Government and politics articles needing translation from Italian Wikipedia Articles with limited geographic scope from March 2025 Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 19:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Agricultural law 12 languages Add topic

