Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Championship systems Toggle Championship systems subsection 1.1 Title match system 1.2 Tournament system 1.3 League system 1.4 Hybrid systems 1.4.1 Tournament of Champions system 1.4.2 Playoff system 1.5 Season system 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Championship 26 languages العربية বাংলা Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά فارسی Français ГӀалгӀай 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano Қазақша Lietuvių 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Русский Shqip Simple English Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Competition "Championships" redirects here. For other uses, see Final (competition) , The Championship (disambiguation) , and Championships (album) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may be in need of reorganization to comply with Wikipedia's layout guidelines .

Please help by editing the article to make improvements to the overall structure.

( October 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Championship" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In sport , a championship is a competition in which the aim is to decide which individual or team is the champion .

Championship systems [ edit ] Various forms of competition can be referred to by the term championship.

Title match system [ edit ] In this system, a competitor has to challenge the current champion to win the championship. A competitor (called number 1 contender ) can challenge the current champion after defeating other challengers. This form of championship is used in individual head-to-head competitions and is particularly associated with combat sports such as wrestling , boxing and mixed martial arts .

Tournament system [ edit ] The term championships (in the plural) is often used to refer to tournament competitions , either using a knockout format , such as at Wimbledon and other championships in tennis , or a mixed format with a group stage followed by knockout rounds, such as used in the European Football Championships .

A variation of the knockout format is the "best-of-X" or series format where two teams face each other for a specified number of times until one team wins the majority of specified games, most of the time the remaining games are not played anymore; only then is the losing team eliminated from contention and the winning team advances to the next level. This format is predominant in American sports such as baseball, ice hockey and basketball, and on test cricket.

League system [ edit ] Championships in various sports, including rugby union and soccer use a league system in which all competitors in the league play each other, either once or a number of times. This is also known as a round robin system.

Hybrid systems [ edit ] Some competitions use a hybrid system that combines traits of two or more of these systems.

Tournament of Champions system [ edit ] The game show Jeopardy!

uses a title match system during regular play, then holds a Tournament of Champions with the longest-running champions under the title match system that operates on a tournament system to determine that season's "Grand Champion." This type of system works best in competitions with numerous competitions in a short period of time (game shows such as Jeopardy!

, in particular, fit this description, since there are five new title matches every week).

Playoff system [ edit ] In many sport leagues, a playoff system is used to determine a championship winner. Teams compete in a regular season of varying formats and a limited number of teams qualify for playoffs . Although this system is mostly identified with the United States and Canada , it is frequently found in other North American countries, and is also standard in sports influenced by North America (e.g. basketball, baseball, ice hockey) as well as most football codes other than soccer. The playoffs (known in some countries, notably Australia , as the "finals series") are a tournament where teams play head-to-head in knockout competition. The championship is often considered the final of the playoffs (e.g., Super Bowl , Stanley Cup Finals , NBA Finals , World Series , etc.). The playoff system can be seen as a hybrid between the league system and tournament system, where a league is used to determine qualifiers for the tournament.

In the NFL , the term "Championship game" is used to refer to the matches which decide the champions of each of the two conferences, the NFC ( NFC Championship Game ) and AFC ( AFC Championship Game ).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] These games are effectively semi-finals as they determine the two competitors in the Super Bowl. The quirk in naming stems from when the NFC and AFC were separate leagues (see: American Football League ) with a respective NFL Championship and AFL Championship , the winners of which would in the AFL's later years meet in the World Championship, now known as the Super Bowl .

Season system [ edit ] In sports such as motor racing, a season consists of a number of individual races, with points being awarded for finishing in the top positions. At the end of the season, the driver/team with the most points wins the championship. Examples include Formula 1 and the World Rally Championship .

See also [ edit ] Championship (professional wrestling) Championship (dog) Champion References [ edit ] ^ Holder, Stephen; Walder, Seth (January 21, 2024).

"NFL playoff conference title games: Lions-49ers, Chiefs-Ravens" .

ESPN . Retrieved February 26, 2024 .

^ Bowman, Emma (January 28, 2024).

"What to know about the NFL conference championship games" .

NPR . Retrieved February 26, 2024 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Championship&oldid=1297742446 " Categories : Terminology used in multiple sports Championships Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing reorganization from October 2012 Articles needing additional references from February 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 06:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Championship 26 languages Add topic

