Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins of the name 2 Ideology 3 Structure Toggle Structure subsection 3.1 White Army 3.2 Administration 3.3 Ranks and insignia 4 Theatres of operation Toggle Theatres of operation subsection 4.1 Southern front 4.2 Eastern (Siberian) front 4.3 Northern and Northwestern fronts 5 Post–Civil War 6 Prominent people 7 Related movements 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Footnotes 10.2 Bibliography 11 External links Toggle the table of contents White movement 47 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Български Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Latviešu Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from White Movement ) Major faction in the Russian Civil War Not to be confused with White Power Movement , White Russia , Belarus , or Nuer White Army .

White movement Бѣлое движеніе Белое движение Flag of Russia Leaders Alexander Kolchak Anton Denikin Pyotr Wrangel Lavr Kornilov † [ 1 ] ...

and others Mikhail Alekseyev # Nikolai Yudenich Grigory Semyonov Pyotr Krasnov Sergey Markov † Anatoly Pepelyayev Pavel Bermondt-Avalov Mikhail Diterikhs Roman von Ungern-Sternberg Dates of operation 1917–1923 Country Russian State Allegiance Russian Government (1918—1919) South Russia (1919–1920) Group(s) White Army [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Volunteer Army White Rebel Army White movement in Transbaikal Ural Army Turkestan Army Far Eastern Army Northern Army Army of Wrangel Caucasus Army Don Army West Russian Volunteer Army AFSR Northwestern Army [ 2 ] Ideology Anti-communism [ 5 ] Non-predetermination [ ru ] Majority: [ 6 ] [ 5 ] Russian nationalism [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Right-wing populism [ 9 ] Antisemitism [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Anti-intellectualism [ 10 ] Factions: Conservatism ( Russian ) Liberalism ( Russian ) Monarchism ( Russian ) Proto-fascism [ 10 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] other different ideologies Political position Big tent [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Majority: Right-wing to far-right Slogan Great Russia, one and indivisible [ ru ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Major actions White Terror [ 20 ] Pogroms (1918–1920) [ 21 ] Size 3.4 million members (peak) Allies See list: Allied intervention : United Kingdom United States Japan China [ 22 ] France Czechoslovakia Estonia Greece Italy Romania Serbia Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes Central Powers intervention : German Empire Austro-Hungarian Empire Ukrainian State Belarus Landeswehr Kingdom of Finland Don Republic Kuban PR Crimean Regional Government Alash Autonomy Mongolia Opponents See list: Bolsheviks and Soviet republics: Russian SFSR Far Eastern Republic Ukrainian SSR Soviet Union Latvian SSR CWP of Estonia Finnish Socialist Workers' Republic Mongolian People's Party Chinese volunteers Separatists: Ukraine Georgia Lithuania Latvia Other factions: Makhnovschyna Green armies Left SRs Right SRs and Mensheviks (after 1918) [ a ] Battles and wars Russian Civil War Southern Western Eastern North Russia Central Asian Ukrainian War of Independence Lithuanian War of Independence Latvian War of Independence Estonian War of Independence Sochi conflict Mongolian Revolution Preceded by Russian Imperial Army Succeeded by White émigrés The White movement , [ b ] also known as the Whites , [ c ] was one of the main factions of the Russian Civil War of 1917–1922. It was led mainly by the right-leaning and conservative officers of the Russian Empire , while the Bolsheviks who led the October Revolution in Russia, also known as the Reds , and their supporters, were regarded as the main enemies of the Whites. It operated as a system of governments and administrations united as the Russian State , which functioned as a military dictatorship [ 24 ] throughout the most of its existence, and military formations collectively referred to as the White Army , [ d ] or the White Guard.

[ e ] Although the White movement included a variety of political opinions in Russia opposed to the Bolsheviks, from the republican -minded liberals through monarchists to the ultra-nationalist Black Hundreds , [ 14 ] [ 16 ] and lacked a universally-accepted doctrine, [ 25 ] the main force behind the movement were the conservative officers, and the resulting movement shared many traits with widespread right-wing counter-revolutionary movements of the time, namely nationalism , racism, distrust of liberal and democratic politics, clericalism , contempt for the common man and dislike of industrial civilization; [ 26 ] in November 1918, the movement united on an authoritarian-right platform around the figure of Alexander Kolchak as its principal leader.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] It generally defended the order of pre-revolutionary Imperial Russia , [ 16 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] although the ideal of the movement was a mythical "Holy Russia", what was a mark of its religious understanding of the world.

[ 31 ] The positive program of the movement was largely summarized in the slogan of " united and indivisible Russia [ ru ] " which meant the restoration of imperial state borders, [ 19 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] and its denial of the right to self-determination .

[ 32 ] The Whites are associated with pogroms and antisemitism ; while the relations with the Jews featured a certain complexity, the movement was largely antisemitic, with the White generals viewing the Revolution as a result of a Jewish conspiracy .

[ 11 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] Some historians distinguish the White movement from the so-called "democratic counter-revolution" led mainly by the Right SRs and the Mensheviks that adhered to the values of parliamentary democracy and maintained democratic anti-Bolshevik governments ( Komuch , Ufa Directory ) until November 1918, [ 35 ] [ 28 ] and then supported either the Whites or the Bolsheviks or opposed both factions.

Following the military defeat of their movement, the Whites expelled from the USSR attempted to continue the struggle by creating armed groups which would wage guerilla warfare in the USSR. Some of the former White commanders also hoped to depose the Soviet authorities by means of collaboration with Nazi Germany during World War II . In exile, remnants and continuations of the movement remained in several organizations, some of which only had narrow support, enduring within the wider White émigré overseas community until after the fall of the European communist states in the Eastern European Revolutions of 1989 and the subsequent dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1990–1991. This community-in-exile of anti-communists often divided into liberal and the more conservative segments, with some still hoping for the restoration of the Romanov dynasty .

Origins of the name [ edit ] In the Russian context after 1917, "White" had three main connotations which were: Reference to the French Revolution , where the forces opposing the Revolution and supporting the restoration of Bourbon monarchy used white as their symbolic colour.

[ 36 ] Historical reference to absolute monarchy , specifically recalling Russia's first Tsar , Ivan III (reigned 1462–1505), [ 37 ] at a period when some styled the ruler of Russian Tsardom Albus Rex ("the White King").

[ 38 ] The white uniforms of the Imperial Russian Army worn by some White Army soldiers.

Ideology [ edit ] Part of a series on Anti-communism History Conflicts and military engagements Revolutions and violence after 1917 Russia White movement Basmachi Finland Whites Hungary Germany Chinese Civil War Spanish Civil War Bando nacional World War II and aftermath Axis powers Anti-Comintern Pact Collaboration Eastern Front Anti-Soviet insurgencies Yugoslav Front Chetniks Post-war period in Germany Resistance in Poland (1944–1989) Greek Civil War Reverse Course Malayan Emergency Korean War Indochina wars Vietnam War Central American crisis New Order Afghan conflict Afghan mujahideen Operation Cyclone Revolutions of 1989 Repression and mass killings White Terror Russia Pogroms Hungary China Shanghai Spain Greece Taiwan Finnish Civil War prison camps First Red Scare Palmer Raids The Holocaust Bodo League massacre Guatemalan genocide Indonesian mass killings of 1965–66 Operation Condor 1981–1982 Iran Massacres East Timor genocide Miscellaneous McCarthyism Decommunization Russia Ukraine Ideologies Anti-imperialism Anti-Marxism Anti-Stalinist Left Liberal socialism Anti-Sovietism Christian democracy Class collaboration Conservatism Authoritarian Neo- Fascism Nazism Neo- Para- Post- Islamism Liberalism Classical Cold War Neo- Personal ideologies Chiangism Fujimorism Khomeinism Metaxism Orthodox Peronism Pinochetism Reaganism Thatcherism Nationalisms Afghan Chinese French Révolution nationale Hong Kong Hungarian Szeged Idea Indonesian Pancasila Korean Ilminism Polish Romanian Russian Spanish National Catholicism Taiwanese Huadu Ukrainian Natsdems Vietnamese Person Dignity Theory Prominent figures Adenauer Antonescu Bandera Batista Berlusconi Boris III Bordaberry Buckley Bush Castelo Branco Chiang Churchill Cohn Dollfuss Dulles Duvalier (François) Duvalier (Jean-Claude) Eisenhower Franco Fujimori Goldwater Habre Habyarimana Hácha Hitler Hoover Horthy John Paul II Johnson Kennedy Khomeini Kishi Kohl Kolchak Lee K. Y.

MacArthur Mannerheim Marcos McCarthy Médici Metaxas Mihailović Milei Montt Mulroney Mussolini Nedić Ngo Nicholas II Nol Pahlavi II Palmer Papadopoulos Park Pavelić Pétain Piłsudski Pinochet Pius XII Poroshenko Reagan Rhee Sann Saakashvili Salazar Selassie Smith Stroessner Suharto Thanom Thatcher Tiso Tunku Vargas (earlier) Videla Wałęsa Welch Yeltsin Political parties Croatian Democratic Union Democratic Party (United States) Democratic Progressive Party Democratic Republican Party (South Korea) FET y de las JONS Golkar Greater Japan Patriotic Party Independent Anti-Communist Party of the West Kataeb Party Khmer Serei Kuomintang (historical, now factions) Law and Justice Liberal Democratic Party (Japan) Liberal Party Brazil South Korea Liberty Korea Party Nazi Party National Fascist Party Republican Party Chile United States Social Republican Party VMRO-DPMNE Organisations Anti-Communist Action Argentine Anticommunist Alliance CIA activities Indonesia Italy Japan Vietnam Contras Falun Gong The Epoch Times Freikorps Iron Front John Birch Society National Revolutionary Army NATO Pancasila Youth Propaganda Due Ukrainian Insurgent Army Unification Church Victims of Communism Memorial Foundation World League for Freedom and Democracy By region China Central and Eastern Europe Japan Tenkō Uyoku dantai Taiwan " Green Terror " Laws and systems Anti-Socialist Laws Peace Preservation Law Temporary Provisions (Taiwan) National Security Act (South Korea) Decree against Communism Communist Control Act of 1954 Ukrainian decommunization laws Anti-Infiltration Act Crucial Communism Teaching Act See also Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric Lavender Scare Anti-national sentiments Chinese PRC Jewish Judeo-Bolshevism North Korean Soviet Union Russian Anti anti-communism Capitalism Cold War Post Second Comparison of Nazism and Stalinism Totalitarianism Western Bloc " Free World " Pro-Americanism Pro-ROC sentiment " Free China " Red Scare Red-baiting U.S. policy toward authoritarian governments Communism portal Politics portal v t e This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Russia Ideologies Eurasianism Duginism Monarchism Tsarism Populism Putinism Russian nationalism All-Russian Christian Ultra Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Traditionalist conservatism Principles Authority Autocracy Bureaucracy Byzantinism Duty Economic interventionism Familialism Imperialism Irredentism Law and order Orthodox values Nuclear Orthodoxy Moscow, third Rome Patriotism Reactionism Russian culture Russification Sobornost Social hierarchy Social order Sovereign democracy Statism History Black Hundreds Great Russia Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and Nationality Russian Empire White movement White Army White émigré Zemstvo Intellectuals Aksakov Boot Chudinova Danilevsky Dostoevsky Dugin Frank Ilyin Karamzin Katkov Khomyakov Leontiev von Lilienfeld Obolensky Pobedonostsev Prokhanov Rozanov Semyonov Shafarevich Shcherbatov Solovyov Solzhenitsyn Sorokin Strakhov Surkov Tarkovsky Tikhomirov Tikhon Trubetskoy Uvarov Vikulov von Wrangel Yuryev Zhukovsky Literature St Petersburg Dialogues (1821) The Organic Theory of Societies (1873) Sociology of Revolution (1925) The Gulag Archipelago (1973) Foundations of Geopolitics (1997) The Notre Dame de Paris Mosque (2005) The Fourth Political Theory (2009) Politicians Alexander I Alexander III Butina Dubrovin Durnovo Gryzlov Kolchak Kornilov von Lilienfeld Luzhkov Malyshkin Mizulina Nicholas I Nicholas II Pikhno Pobedonostsev Putin Rodzianko Rogozin Rostopchin Sadovnichiy Shulgin Slutsky Surkov Tolstoy von Ungern Uvarov Vladimir Volodin Yuryev Zhirinovsky Parties Active Eurasia Party Great Russia Liberal Democratic Party of Russia Monarchist Party of Russia Rodina Russian All-People's Union Union of Right Forces United Russia Defunct For Truth Liberal Democratic Party of the Soviet Union People's Union Pamyat Society Union of the Russian People Organisations All-Russia People's Front Izborsky Club Krepostniki National Alliance of Russian Solidarists Union of the Russian People Media Elementy (Defunct) Kievlyanin Kozma Minin Nash Sovremennik Russkoye Znamya Zavtra Znamya Related topics Anti-communism Anti-socialism Anti-Islamism Anti-national sentiments American Chechen Jew Polish Romanian Tatar Turkish Ukrainian Opposition to LGBTQ rights Politics of Russia Liberalism Russia for Russians Russia under Vladimir Putin Serfdom in Russia Silovik Conservatism portal Russia portal v t e Propaganda poster of the Russian Whites, contrasting its positive ideal of a "Holy" Christian Russia to Soviet Russia of the Bolsheviks; the Bolsheviks are marked with Jewish facial traits Although the Bolsheviks had many opponents that ahered to the values of parliamentary democracy , such as the Mensheviks and the SRs , the main force of the White movement were the imperial army officers, since, unlike the moderate left politicians, they were able to organize an armed movement and had a necessary unity of common experience developed in the army and the wars the Russian Empire was involved in. Although the Whites were disunited by such factors as personal rivalries, distances between the military formations, and lack of a clearly formulated political program and doctrine and a leader with an absolute authority who could formulate those, they shared a common ideological military culture of officer corps of the Russian Empire, which included such key elements as conservatism, distrust of technology and industrial civilization, "faith in élan " as a key to victory, and conservative military anti-intellectualism . During the Civil War, the officers did not produce a political program and a critique of Bolshevism, but instead simply viewed the revolutionaries as inherently evil and expected the people to realize this and turn to the conservative values of the Whites. The professional officers rejected "politics", understood primarily as party activities undermining the authority of the Tsar, and modern rational political thought promoting equality and social justice, as threats to the national spirit and the army. In such worldview, the army "stood above politics", while the defense of the autocracy was not a political act, but an article of faith. This stance was not consciously monarchist, and during the February Revolution the officers did not resist the overthrow of Tsarism in order to keep the military effort; in a similar way, they mainly abstained from defending the Provisional Government against the Bolsheviks. Most officers preferred not to engage in political struggle during initial period after October Revolution, while the organizers of the Volunteer Army represented only the most conservative minority.

[ 10 ] The White officers believed socialist and pacifist politicians and intellectuals to be their enemies, condemning socialism as materialistic
and anti-individualistic as opposed to "spiritual" and patriotic values of the army, and pacifism as threatening these values and allied with socialism. Liberal politics were distrusted as well, and during the Civil War the Whites preferred the Tsarist bureaucrats and officers to liberal civilians to administer the White-controlled territories.

Racial antisemitism was widespread in the army and in Russian society in general; the Jews could not become army officers and were mistreated in the army, the officers believing them to be guilty of spreading subversive ideologies and not being able to become good soldiers. During the Civil War, antisemitism varied among the White officers, but was a crucial element of the ideology of the Whites.

[ 10 ] Despite their conservatism, the Whites did not openly proclaim a reactionary movement and instead attempted not to alienate potential support and to attract a broad base, avoiding controversial decisions and openly expressing their stance on the major issues, and producing programs subject to various interpretations while neglecting propaganda work and promoting positive ideals.

[ 10 ] The Whites had the stated aim to reverse the October Revolution and remove the Bolsheviks from power before a constituent assembly , dissolved by the Bolsheviks in January 1918 could be convened.

[ 39 ] There was no clear position on whether to consider the Provisional Government legitimate. However, while the socialists believed the socialist-dominated Constituent Assembly dissolved by the Bolsheviks to be legitimate, the White leaders did not recognize it and insisted on conveining a new Assembly after the Civil War. From 1918, Anton Denikin , while rejecting the outright slogans for the restoration of Tsarism popular within the officers as a possible detriment to their cause and recruitment and claiming the military could not decide for a government instead of the Russian people, [ 40 ] began referring to a future "National Assembly". While its difference from the Constituent Assembly had never been defined, this change could imply that the Whites did not support the principles of popular sovereignity and universal suffrage.

[ 10 ] While the leaders of the movement continued to formally reject reactionary ideas, and some of the Whites accepted the ideas of the abolition of monarchy and some reforms, in genreal the movement sought to reestablish the traditional imperial social order.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] During the last phase of its existence, the movement under the leadership of Baron Pyotr Wrangel reverted to the term "Constituent Assembly", but issued a manifesto which advocated the necessity of  "the Russian people" choosing "its own MASTER," implying that Wrangel meant a new Tsar.

[ 41 ] The movement was generally conservative, while the largest group within the movement which had leanings most similar to fascism were the Cossacks , who were led by the economic motive of defending their estates and by their anti-modern culture. Their primary leader was Pyotr Krasnov ,a staunch antisemite who appealed to the Cossacks with demagogue rhetoric and ideas of a mythical Cossack past. During World War II , Krasnov would become a prominent collaborator with Nazi Germany, leading collaborationist Cossack units.

[ 42 ] Among the members of the movement could be monarchists, republicans, [ 25 ] rightists, and Kadets .

[ 43 ] The Kadets were one of the largest liberal parties in Russia, however, many of them shifted to conservatism during the Revolution [ 44 ] and more broadly World War I, when the Kadet party started promoting military dictatorship and territorial integrity of the Russian Empire and afterwards by its scale of support of the Whites became next to the Russian nationalist parties.

[ 45 ] At first, the Kadets as the main party of the Russian State attempted to build the government as a "collective dictatorship", until the Kolchak coup took place, and the Kadets became the supporters of Admiral Alexander Kolchak .

[ 46 ] Kolchak became the dictator of the Russian State and was recognized as the principle leader of the Whites while gaining the title of the Supreme Ruler of Russia, thus uniting the movement around himself on an authoritarian-right platform.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 6 ] Kolchak was a proponent of Russian nationalism and militarism , while opposing democracy which he believed to be tied to pacifism, internationalism, and socialism.

[ 47 ] The Whites presented themselves as proponents of Russian partiotism, nationalism and conservatism as opposed to internationalism and revolutionary social programme of the Bolsheviks; the Whites relied on conservative populism which maintained that the Russian people possessed unique and valuable qualities which distinguished them from Westerners and made Western institutions in Russia inappropriate. They proclaimed that they were fighting "for Russia" and implied that Russia as a political entity could exist only on the basis of traditional social and political principles congruent with the history of Russia, and those who wanted to fundamentally change the social and political order were thus against Russia. They proclaimed that the army "stood above classes" just as above "politics" and were reluctant to hesitant to solve social contradictions, partially because it would alienate the support of the landowners and owning classes. Although such leaders as Denikin and Kolchak made attempts to implement a land reform which proposed a compulsory alienation of land with compensation to former owners, these attempts were sabotaged by the lower-ranking officers and Tsarist bureaucrats to which the White leaders granted the authority to implement the reform, while the White leaders took little action to enforce the implementation of their reforms.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] The Whites rejected ethnic particularism and separatism .

[ 50 ] It proclaimed the slogan of " united and indivisible Russia [ ru ] " which meant its denial of the right to self-determination and the restoration of imperial state borders with possible exceptions for such states as Poland and Finland; in accordance with it, the Whites attempted to operate on the territories of the former empire they regarded as "Russia" but where ethnic Russians were a minority. This principle was violated during the Estonian War of Independence , where the Russian Whites aided the Estonian Republic. However, in accordance with this principle, the Whites did not recognize the Ukrainian People's Republic and fought against it in Ukrainian War of Independence , as well as against the Mountainous Republic of the Northern Caucasus . Following this principle, Kolchak refused General Mannerheim 's offer to receive military aid from Finland in return for recognizing its independence, since for Kolchak a "Russia in pieces was not Russia." [ 19 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 32 ] [ 49 ] Whites differed on policies toward the German Empire in its extended occupation of western Russia , the Baltic states , Poland , and Ukraine on the Eastern Front in the closing days of the World War, debating whether or not to ally with it. While such White leaders as Pyotr Krasnov ( Don Republic ) and Pavlo Skoropadskyi (German-occupied Ukrainian State ) agreed to receive support from Germany, many other leaders remained loyal to the Allies.

[ 40 ] An important element of the ideology of the Whites was antisemitism. There was a certain complexity with the relations with the Jews, since the 'liberal' official White programs never featured antisemitism, and there was even a number Jewish officers in the White armies. However, antisemitism was shared by the White generals and spread by White propaganda, which blamed the Jews for the Revolution and spreading non-Russian and 'modern' values; the officers described Jews as microbes and blamed them for misfortunes ranging from military defeat to inflation and lack of foreign support, while the White Orthodox Christian priests denounced Jews as Christ-killers and called for a holy crusade against Jewish Bolshevism. Antisemitism varies among the leaders of the Whites: while for such figures as Krasnov every Jew was a conspirator against Russia, Denikin was moderate. Denikin confessed to a Jewish delegation which asked for protection that he did not like Jews and he took various steps against Jewish economic interests, but denied antisemitism of the Whites and that the pogroms directed by the Whites were directed against the Jews. While it appears that such figures as Denikin did not share the militant antisemitism of their subordinates, they did little to stop them.

[ 51 ] [ 11 ] [ 33 ] Antisemitic White propaganda poster Who Rules Moscow? Here they are – Red Bolsheviks, Communists-Socialists, Proletarians (1919), caricature of senior Bolsheviks Yakov Sverdlov and Leon Trotsky with the Star of David , depicting the Bolsheviks as Jews oppressing Russians and striving for money and power The historian Peter Holquist describes the Russian nationalist and antisemitic underpinnings of the Russian White Terror in the following way: "Anti-Soviet commanders and foot soldiers alike believed they knew who their enemies were, and they equally believed they knew what they had to do with such foes. White commanders sifted their POWs, selecting out those they deemed undesirable and incorrigible (Jews, Balts, Chinese, Communists), and executed these individuals in groups later, a process the Whites described as "filtering." [ 52 ] Joshua Sanborn traces the antisemitic White Terror to state-supported antisemitism of the Russian Empire: [ 33 ] ...in the case of the Jews, we see not only the development of terror practices (like hostage-taking, decimation, mass retribution, mass deportation, rape, robbery, and sadistic, spectacularly cruel violence), but of the social intent. Most notably, efforts on the part of Ianushkevich ’s Stavka to gather material on Jewish behavior in the army stressed that commanders were to gather this to prove all the “harm” that Jews posed to the army and to the nation. [...] These were processes that were justified by the war atmosphere, but whose vision extended well into the post-war period. As a result, the White Terror, like the Imperial Army's Terror campaign from 1914–1917, was revolutionary in its Terror against Jews, and who knows, might have taken this kernel even further had they prevailed in the Civil War.

The propaganda service of the Volunteer Army, the Osvag [ ru ] , made the claim that "the Jews must pay for everything: for the February and October revolutions, for Bolshevism and for the peasants who took their land from the owners". The organization also reissued The Protocols of the Elders of Zion . Although Denikin's troops committed only 17.2% of the pogroms (most of which were carried out by Ukrainian nationalists or by rebel armies not affiliated with any side), [ dubious – discuss ] "white" officers praise soldiers who commit anti-Semitic crimes, some of whom even receive bonuses.

[ 53 ] Winston Churchill personally warned General Anton Denikin (1872–1947), formerly of the Imperial Army and later a major White military leader, whose forces effected pogroms and persecutions against the Jews: [M]y task in winning support in Parliament for the Russian Nationalist cause will be infinitely harder if well-authenticated complaints continue to be received from Jews in the zone of the Volunteer Armies.

[ 54 ] However, Denikin did not dare to confront his officers and remained content with vague formal condemnations.

[ citation needed ] Some warlords who were aligned with the White movement, such as Grigory Semyonov and Roman Ungern von Sternberg , did not acknowledge any authority but their own.

[ citation needed ] Structure [ edit ] White Army [ edit ] Main articles: White Army , White Terror (Russia) , and Pogroms during the Russian Civil War See also: Russian Army (1919) , Volunteer Army , Siberian Army , and West Russian Volunteer Army "Why aren't you in the army?", Volunteer Army recruiting poster during the Russian Civil War Kornilov's Shock Detachment ( 8th Army ), later became the Volunteer Army's elite Shock Regiment The Volunteer Army in South Russia became the most prominent and the largest of the various and disparate White forces.

[ 10 ] Starting off as a small and well-organized military in January 1918, the Volunteer Army soon grew. The Kuban Cossacks joined the White Army and conscription of both peasants and Cossacks began. In late February 1918, 4,000 soldiers under the command of General Aleksei Kaledin were forced to retreat from Rostov-on-Don due to the advance of the Red Army. In what became known as the Ice March , they traveled to Kuban in order to unite with the Kuban Cossacks , most of whom did not support the Volunteer Army. In March, 3,000 men under the command of General Viktor Pokrovsky joined the Volunteer Army, increasing its membership to 6,000, and by June to 9,000. In 1919 the Don Cossacks joined the Army. In that year between May and October, the Volunteer Army grew from 64,000 to 150,000 soldiers and was better supplied than its Red counterpart.

[ 55 ] The White Army's rank-and-file comprised active anti-Bolsheviks, such as Cossacks, nobles, and peasants, as conscripts and as volunteers.

The White movement had access to various naval forces, both seagoing and riverine, especially the Black Sea Fleet .

Aerial forces available to the Whites included the Slavo-British Aviation Corps (S.B.A.C.).

[ 56 ] The Russian ace Alexander Kazakov operated within this unit.

Administration [ edit ] The White movement's leaders and first members [ 57 ] came mainly from the ranks of military officers.  Many came from outside the nobility, such as generals Mikhail Alekseyev and Anton Denikin , who originated in serf families, or General Lavr Kornilov , a Cossack.

The White generals never mastered administration; [ 58 ] they often utilized "prerevolutionary functionaries" or "military officers with monarchististic inclinations" for administering White-controlled regions.

[ 59 ] The White Armies were often lawless and disordered.

[ 39 ] Also, White-controlled territories had multiple different and varying currencies with unstable exchange-rates. The chief currency, the Volunteer Army's ruble, had no gold backing .

[ 60 ] Ranks and insignia [ edit ] Main article: Ranks and insignia of the White Movement Theatres of operation [ edit ] Russian Civil War in the west The Whites and the Reds fought the Russian Civil War from November 1917 until 1921, and isolated battles continued in the Far East until June 1923. The White Army—aided by the Allied forces ( Triple Entente ) from countries such as Japan , the United Kingdom , France , Greece , Italy and the United States and (sometimes) the Central Powers forces such as Germany and Austria-Hungary —fought in Siberia , Ukraine , and in Crimea . They were defeated by the Red Army due to military and ideological disunity, as well as the determination and increasing unity of the Red Army.

The White Army operated in three main theatres : Southern front [ edit ] Main articles: Southern Front of the Russian Civil War and Southern Russia intervention In the summer of 1919, Denikin's troops captured Kharkiv Organization of the White Army located in the South started on 15 November 1917, ( Old Style ) under General Mikhail Alekseyev . In December 1917, General Lavr Kornilov took over the military command of the newly named Volunteer Army until his death in April 1918, after which General Anton Denikin took over, becoming head of the "Armed Forces of the South of Russia" in January 1919.

The Southern Front featured massive-scale operations and posed the most dangerous threat to the Bolshevik Government. At first it depended entirely upon volunteers in Russia proper, mostly the Cossacks, among the first to oppose the Bolshevik Government. On 23 June 1918, the Volunteer Army (8,000–9,000 men) began its so-called Second Kuban Campaign with support from Pyotr Krasnov . By September, the Volunteer Army comprised 30,000 to 35,000 members, thanks to mobilization of the Kuban Cossacks gathered in the North Caucasus . Thus, the Volunteer Army took the name of the Caucasus Volunteer Army. On 23 January 1919, the Volunteer Army under Denikin oversaw the defeat of the 11th Soviet Army and then captured the North Caucasus region. After capturing the Donbas , Tsaritsyn and Kharkiv in June, Denikin's forces launched an attack towards Moscow on 3 July, (N.S.). Plans envisaged 40,000 fighters under the command of General Vladimir May-Mayevsky storming the city.

After General Denikin's attack upon Moscow failed in 1919, the Armed Forces of the South of Russia retreated. On 26 and 27 March 1920, the remnants of the Volunteer Army evacuated from Novorossiysk to the Crimea, where they merged with the army of Pyotr Wrangel .

Eastern (Siberian) front [ edit ] Main articles: Eastern Front of the Russian Civil War , Siberian intervention , and White movement in Transbaikal The Eastern Front started in spring 1918 as a secret movement among army officers and right-wing socialist forces. In that front, they launched an attack in collaboration with the Czechoslovak Legions , who were then stranded in Siberia by the Bolshevik Government, who had barred them from leaving Russia, and with the Japanese, who also intervened to help the Whites in the east.

Admiral Alexander Kolchak headed the eastern White Army and a provisional Russian government. Despite some significant success in 1919, the Whites were defeated being forced back to Far Eastern Russia, where they continued fighting until October 1922. When the Japanese withdrew, the Soviet army of the Far Eastern Republic retook the territory. The Civil War was officially declared over at this point, although Anatoly Pepelyayev still controlled the Ayano-Maysky District at that time. Pepelyayev's Yakut revolt , which concluded on 16 June 1923, represented the last military action in Russia by a White Army. It ended with the defeat of the final anti-communist enclave in the country, signalling the end of all military hostilities relating to the Russian Civil War.

Northern and Northwestern fronts [ edit ] Main article: North Russia intervention Headed by Nikolai Yudenich , Evgeni Miller , and Anatoly Lieven , the White forces in the North demonstrated less co-ordination than General Denikin's Army of Southern Russia. The Northwestern Army allied itself with Estonia , while Lieven's West Russian Volunteer Army sided with the Baltic nobility . Authoritarian support led by Pavel Bermondt-Avalov and Stanisław Bułak-Bałachowicz played a role as well. The most notable operation on this front, Operation White Sword , saw an unsuccessful advance towards the Russian capital of Petrograd in the autumn of 1919.

Post–Civil War [ edit ] Main article: White émigré Blagoveshchensky Temple, a Russian Orthodox Church in Harbin The defeated anti-Bolshevik Russians went into exile, congregating in Belgrade , Berlin , Paris , Harbin , Istanbul , and Shanghai . They established military and cultural networks that lasted through World War II (1939–1945), e.g. the Harbin and Shanghai Russians . Afterward, the White Russians' anti-communist activists established a home base in the United States, to which numerous refugees emigrated.

White propaganda poster Moreover, in the 1920s and the 1930s the White movement established organisations outside Russia, which were meant to depose the Soviet government with guerrilla warfare , e.g., the Russian All-Military Union , the Brotherhood of Russian Truth , and the National Alliance of Russian Solidarists , a far-right anticommunist organization founded in 1930 by a group of young White emigres in Belgrade, Yugoslavia. Some White émigrés adopted pro-Soviet sympathies and were termed "Soviet patriots". These people formed organizations such as the Mladorossi , the Eurasianists , and the Smenovekhovtsy . A Russian cadet corps was established to prepare the next generation of anti-Communists for the "spring campaign"—a hopeful term denoting a renewed military campaign to reclaim Russia from the Soviet Government. In any event, many cadets volunteered to fight for the Russian Protective Corps during World War II, when a number of White Russians collaborated with Nazi Germany .

[ 61 ] The collaborators included some prominent figures of the White movement, like Pyotr Krasnov , the leader of the White Don Cossacks during the civil war.

Emblem used by white émigré volunteers in the Spanish Civil War After the war, active anti-Soviet combat was almost exclusively continued by the National Alliance of Russian Solidarists . Other organizations either dissolved, or began concentrating exclusively on self-preservation and/or educating the youth. Various youth organizations, such as the Russian Scouts-in-Exteris, promoted providing children with a background in pre-Soviet Russian culture and heritage. Some supported Zog I of Albania during the 1920s and a few independently served with the Nationalists during the Spanish Civil War . White Russians also served alongside the Soviet Red Army during the Soviet invasion of Xinjiang and the Islamic rebellion in Xinjiang in 1937 .

Prominent people [ edit ] Alexander Kolchak decorating his troops in Siberia The Government of South Russia created by Pyotr Wrangel in Sevastopol , Crimea in April 1920 Sergei Voitsekhovskii (seated center), Major General in the White movement and later Czechoslovak Army general Mikhail Alekseyev Vladimir Antonov Nicholas Savich Bakulin Pavel Bermondt-Avalov Stanisław Bułak-Bałachowicz Anton Denikin Mikhail Diterikhs Mikhail Drozdovsky Alexander Dutov Dmitrii Fedotoff-White Ivan Ilyin Nikolay Iudovich Ivanov Alexey Kaledin Vladimir Kantakuzen Vladimir Kappel Alexander Kolchak Lavr Kornilov Pyotr Krasnov Mikhail Kvetsinsky Alexander Kutepov Anatoly Lieven Konstantin Mamontov Sergey Markov Vladimir May-Mayevsky Evgeny Miller Najmuddin of Gotzo Konstantin Petrovich Nechaev Viktor Pokrovsky Leonid Punin Aleksandr Rodzyanko Grigory Semyonov Andrei Shkuro Roman von Ungern-Sternberg Pyotr Nikolayevich Wrangel Sergei Wojciechowski Nikolai Yudenich Boris Annenkov Related movements [ edit ] Main article: Pro-independence movements in the Russian Civil War After the February Revolution , Finland, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania declared themselves independent. However, they had a substantial Communist or Russian military presence within their newly proposed independent states at the time. Civil wars followed, wherein the anti-communist side may be referred to as White Armies, e.g. in Finland the White Guard -led, partially conscripted Finnish White Army [ fi ] ( Finnish : Valkoinen Armeija ) who fought against Soviet Russia -sponsored Red Guards . However, since they were nationalists, their aims were substantially different from the Russian White Army proper; for instance, Russian White generals never explicitly supported Finnish independence. The defeat of the Russian White Army made the point moot in this dispute. The countries remained independent and governed by non-Communist governments.

See also [ edit ] Russian State (1918–1920) 1st Infantry Brigade (South Africa) Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War Basmachi movement Czechoslovak Legions Estonian War of Independence Finnish Civil War Grand Orient of Russia's Peoples Great Siberian Ice March Italian Legione Redenta Russian All-Military Union Russian diaspora Russian nationalism Red Terror Soviet–Ukrainian War White Terror (Russia) Ukrainian War of Independence Notes [ edit ] ^ Mensheviks and SRs made attempts to overthrow the White administrations and create their own such as the "Political Centre" in 1920 [ 23 ] ^ Russian: pre–1918 Бѣлое движеніе / post–1918 Белое движение , romanized : Beloye dvizheniye , IPA: [ˈbʲɛləɪ dvʲɪˈʐenʲɪɪ] . The old spelling was retained by the Whites to differentiate from the Reds.

^ Russian : Бѣлые / Белые , romanized : Belyje .

^ Russian : Бѣлая армія / Белая армия , romanized : Belaya armiya .

^ Russian : Бѣлая гвардія / Белая гвардия , romanized : Belaya gvardiya .

References [ edit ] Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Evan Mawdsley (2008) The Russian Civil War : 27 ^ "ETIS - Rets.: Reigo Rosenthal, Loodearmee, Tallinn: Argo, 2006" .

www.etis.ee . Retrieved 2019-01-10 .

^ The White Guard Archived 25 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine // "Banquet Campaign" of 1904 – Big Irgiz – Moscow: The Great Russian Encyclopedia, 2005 – Page 190 – (The Great Russian Encyclopedia : in 35 Volumes / Editor-in-Chief Yury Osipov ; 2004–2017, Volume 3) – ISBN 5-85270-331-1 ^ "The White armies" .

Alpha History . 15 August 2019.

Archived from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 30 March 2021 .

^ a b Kenez 1980 , p. 74.

^ a b Предисловие // Красный террор в годы Гражданской войны: По материалам Особой следственной комиссии по расследованию злодеяний большевиков.

Archived 2020-08-08 at the Wayback Machine / Под ред. докторов исторических наук Ю. Г. Фельштинского и Г. И. Чернявского — London, 1992. "Yuri Felshtinsky writes that there were differences in the ideology of the White movement, but the prevailing desire was to restore a democratic, parliamentary political system, private property and market relations in Russia." ^ Никулин В.В., Красников В.В., Юдин А.Н. (2005).

Советская Россия: Проблемы социально-экономического и политического развития (PDF) . Тамбов: Издательство ТГТУ.

ISBN 5-8265-0394-7 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) "Архивированная копия" (PDF) . Archived from the original on 2012-01-03 . Retrieved 2020-04-25 .

^ The White Movement and the National Question in Russia: a collective monograph. / Edited by Doctor of Historical Sciences, Professor V. T. Tormozov, Candidate of Historical Sciences A. G. Pismensky. Authors: V. T. Tormozov, A. A. Ivanova, and others. — Moscow: Saratov State University Publishing House, 2009. — 157 p. — ISBN 978-5-8323-0602-5 .

^ Kenez 1980 , pp. 77–78.

^ a b c d e f g h Kenez 1980 .

^ a b c Oleg Budnitskii (2012).

Russian Jews Between the Reds and the Whites, 1917-1920 . University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 3.

ISBN 9780812208146 .

^ Peter Kenez (2008).

Red Advance, White Defeat: Civil War in South Russia 1919–1920 . New Acdemia+ORM.

ISBN 9781955835176 .

^ Oberländer, Erwin (1966).

"The All-Russian Fascist Party" .

Journal of Contemporary History .

1 (1): 158– 173.

doi : 10.1177/002200946600100110 .

ISSN 0022-0094 .

JSTOR 259654 . Retrieved 23 November 2024 .

^ a b Osborne, R. (2023, April 14).

White Army of Russia | History, Significance & Composition . Study.com. "Loosely commanded by former imperial admiral Alexander Kolchack, the White Army was composed of volunteers, conscripts, liberals, conservatives, monarchists, religious fundamentalists, and any group that opposed Bolshevik rule. These various groups had little in common besides their opposition to Bolshevik rule." ^ Slashchov-Krymsky Ya. A. White Crimea, 1920: Memoirs and documents. Moscow, 1990. P. 40. "According to the leader of the defense of Crimea from the Bolsheviks in the winter of 1920, General Ya. A. Slashchev-Krymsky , the White movement was a mixture of the pro-Cadet and pro-Octobrist upper classes and the Menshevik - SR lower classes." ^ a b c "Первая лекция историка К. М. Александрова о Гражданской войне. Часть первая" .

belrussia.ru . St. Petersburg. 5 January 2010. Archived from the original on 2010-10-31 . Retrieved 2010-10-18 .

The White movement as a whole, despite the presence of political shades: republicans, monarchists, non-predeterminists, was a military-political movement that defended the values of Stolypin 's Russia.

^ a b c The People in Arms: Military Myth and National Mobilization Since the French Revolution . Cambridge University Press. 2 November 2006.

ISBN 978-0-521-03025-0 .

^ a b c Robinson, Paul (2002). "Civil War".

The White Russian Army in Exile 1920-1941 . Oxford University Press. pp.

1– 15.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199250219.003.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-925021-9 .

^ a b c "In the Wake of Empire" .

^ Rinke, Stefan; Wildt, Michael (2017).

Revolutions and Counter-Revolutions: 1917 and Its Aftermath from a Global Perspective . Campus Verlag. p. 58.

ISBN 978-3593507057 .

^ "YIVO | Russian Civil War" .

yivoencyclopedia.org . Retrieved 2022-11-08 .

^ Joana Breidenbach (2005). Pál Nyíri, Joana Breidenbach (ed.).

China inside out: contemporary Chinese nationalism and transnationalism (illustrated ed.). Central European University Press. p. 90.

ISBN 978-963-7326-14-1 . Retrieved 18 March 2012 .

Then there occurred another story which has become traumatic, this one for the Russian nationalist psyche. At the end of the year 1918, after the Russian Revolution, the Chinese merchants in the Russian Far East demanded the Chinese government to send troops for their protection, and Chinese troops were sent to Vladivostok to protect the Chinese community: about 1600 soldiers and 700 support personnel.

^ The Soviet High Command: A Military-political History, 1918-1941: A Military Political History, 1918-1941 . Routledge. 4 July 2013.

ISBN 978-1-136-33959-2 .

^ Suny, Ronald (2017).

Red Flag Unfurled: History, Historians, and the Russian Revolution . Verso.

ISBN 978-1-78478-566-6 .

White Terror, claims the late historian of the Whites, Viktor G. Bortnevski "was logically produced by a White political system of military dictatorship..." ^ a b Kenez 1980 , p. 59.

^ Kenez 1980 , p. 80.

^ a b А. В. Шубин .

"Великая Российская революция. 10 вопросов" (PDF) (in Russian).

Authoritarian tendencies also prevailed in the territory occupied by the opponents of the Soviet Republic. The militarization of life, the growth of the influence of officers, and the strengthening of right-wing socio-political groups led to the evolution of the political system to the right. [...] On the night of November 18, 1918, the army overthrew the Directory, handing over power to the Supreme Ruler, Admiral A. Kolchak. His dictatorship was supported by other leaders of the White movement.

^ a b c Russia in Revolution: An Empire in Crisis, 1890 to 1928 . Oxford University Press. 2017.

ISBN 978-0-19-873482-6 .

^ a b А. В. Шубин (2019).

1918 год. Революция, кровью омытая (in Russian). Akademicheskiĭ proekt. p. 531.

ISBN 978-5-8291-2317-8 .

...with the ritual condemnation of reaction, the goal of the movement was to restore order, in its main features corresponding to the pre-revolutionary one.

^ a b Peter Kenez (2008).

Red Advance, White Defeat: Civil War in South Russia 1919–1920 . New Acdemia+ORM.

ISBN 9781955835176 .

Not all the participants in the White movement wanted to recreate tsarist Russia. [...] Nevertheless, the Civil War divided those who preferred tsarist Russia to the society which they feared their country was heading toward, and those who hated the old and had confidence that they could build a more just and rational society. After three years of struggle the Whites lost the war, proving that the traditional order had too few defenders... The defeat of the Whites was the final and conclusive defeat of Imperial Russia.

^ The Bolsheviks in Russian Society: The Revolution and the Civil Wars . Yale University Press. January 1997.

ISBN 978-0-300-14634-9 .

^ a b А. В. Шубин .

"Великая Российская революция. 10 вопросов" (PDF) (in Russian).

The White movement fought for the "united and indivisible" Russia and did not recognize the right of nations to self-determination.

^ a b c Suny, Ronald (14 November 2017).

Red Flag Unfurled: History, Historians, and the Russian Revolution . Verso Books. pp.

1– 320.

ISBN 978-1-78478-566-6 .

^ Kenez 1980 , p. 79.

^ https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/nationalities-papers/article/abs/democratic-counterrevolution-of-1918-in-siberia/902F77B1E6F60CF8CC8EDFCB66A3894 ^ A/AS Level History for AQA Revolution and Dictatorship: Russia, 1917–1953 Student Book . Cambridge University Press. 4 February 2016.

ISBN 978-1-107-58738-0 .

^ Lehtovirta, Jaako (2002).

"The Use of Titles in Heberstein's 'Commentarii'. Was the Muscovite Tsar a King or an Emperor?" . In von Gardner, Johann (ed.).

Schriften zur Geistesgeschichte des östlichen Europa [ Essays on the intellectual history of eastern Europe ]. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. p. 190.

ISSN 0340-6490 . Retrieved 31 July 2015 .

It was Ivan III (1462–1505) who is well known as the first one to present himself as a tsar to foreigners, though it must be accepted that his use of the title was very sparse.

^ Lehtovirta, Jaako (2002).

"The Use of Titles in Heberstein's 'Commentarii'. Was the Muscovite Tsar a King or an Emperor?" . In von Gardner, Johann (ed.).

Schriften zur Geistesgeschichte des östlichen Europa [ Essays on the intellectual history of eastern Europe ]. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. p. 189.

ISSN 0340-6490 . Retrieved 31 July 2015 .

[...] the brief mention that the Muscovite ruler is by some called 'the White King' ('albus rex').

^ a b Christopher Lazarski, "White Propaganda Efforts in the South during the Russian Civil War, 1918–19 (The Alekseev-Denikin Period)", The Slavonic and East European Review, Vol. 70, No. 4 (Oct., 1992), pp. 688–707.

^ a b Kenez 1980 , p. 69.

^ Kenez 1980 , p. 70.

^ Kenez 1980 , pp. 79, 81.

^ Kenez, Peter, Civil War, 90.

^ Kenez 1980 , p. 1970.

^ The Lost Opportunity: Attempts at Unification of the Anti-Bolsheviks:1917-1919: Moscow, Kiev, Jassy, Odessa . University Press of America. 15 September 2008.

ISBN 978-0-7618-4200-2 .

^ А. В. Шубин (2019).

1918 год. Революция, кровью омытая (in Russian). Akademicheskiĭ proekt. p. 531.

ISBN 978-5-8291-2317-8 .

^ White Siberia , N.G.O. Pereira. McGill-Queens University Press, 1996. p. 109 ^ Kenez 1980 , p. 70-77.

^ a b The "Russian" Civil Wars, 1916-1926: Ten Years that Shook the World . Oxford University Press. 2015.

ISBN 978-0-19-023304-4 .

^ Christopher Lazarski, "White Propaganda Efforts," 689.

^ Kenez 1980 , pp. 78–79.

^ "Violent Russia, Deadly Marxism? Russia in the Epoch of Violence, 1905–21" (PDF) .

www.history.upenn.edu .

^ Rubenstein, Richard L., and John K. Roth.

Approaches to Auschwitz: The Legacy of the Holocaust . London: SCM, 1987, p. 138.

^ Joseph Cohen, Michael (1985).

Churchill and the Jews . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-0-7146-3254-4 .

Archived from the original on 2016-05-21.

^ Kenez, Peter, Civil War, 18–22.

^ "The R.A.F. in Russia" .

The Aeroplane .

17 (1): 82. 1919.

Archived from the original on 27 June 2014 . Retrieved 9 February 2014 .

Soon after landing we started to recruit for the Slavo-British Aviation Corps (S.B.A.C.) [...].

^ Kenez, Peter, Civil War, 18.

^ Kenez 1980 , p. 65.

^ Viktor G. Bortnevski, White Administration and White Terror, 360.

^ Kenez, Peter, Civil War, 94–95.

^ Beyda, Oleg (2014).

" 'Iron Cross of the Wrangel's Army': Russian Emigrants as Interpreters in the Wehrmacht" .

The Journal of Slavic Military Studies .

27 (3): 430– 448.

doi : 10.1080/13518046.2014.932630 .

ISSN 1351-8046 .

S2CID 144274571 .

Bibliography [ edit ] See also: Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War § White armies Kenez, Peter (1980). "The Ideology of the White Movement".

Soviet Studies .

32 (32): 58– 83.

doi : 10.1080/09668138008411280 .

Kenez, Peter (1977).

Civil War in South Russia, 1919–1920: The Defeat of the Whites . Berkeley: University of California Press.

Kenez, Peter (1971).

Civil War in South Russia, 1918: The First Year of the Volunteer Army . Berkeley: University of California Press.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to White movement .

Anti-Bolshevik Russia in pictures Museum and Archives of the White Movement Memory and Honour Association (in Russian) History of the White Movement (in Russian) v t e Armies of Russia Principality of Moscow Rynda 1380–1698 Landed Army c.

1700 Tsardom of Russia Army of the Tsardom of Russia Streltsy c.

1550 –1721 New Order Regiments 1648–98 Army of Peter the Great Toy army of Peter the Great Russian Empire Imperial Russian Army 1721–1917 Russian Republic Russian Army (1917) Russian Civil War White Army 1918–23 Red Army 1918–22 Soviet Union Red Army 1922–46 Soviet Army 1946–92 Russian Federation CIS Armed Forces 1991–93 Ground Forces 1992–present [update] v t e White armies and fleets of the Russian Civil War Russian Army Southern Front Armed Forces of South Russia 1st Army Corps 2nd Army Corps 3rd Army Corps Astrakhan Army [ ru ] Volunteer Army Don Army Units Army Group Kiev of General Bredov Kiev Region Army Group [ ru ] Novorossiysk Region Army Group [ ru ] Kharkov Region Army Group North Caucasus Army [ ru ] Caucasus Army Crimean–Azov Army Kuban Army Black Sea Fleet Caspian Flotilla Army of Wrangel Ukrainian Galician Army (since November 1919) Southern Army Eastern Front Siberian Army 1st Army (Siberian Army) [ ru ] 2nd Army (Siberian Army) [ ru ] 3rd Army (Siberian Army) [ ru ] 1st Middle Siberian Corps 2nd Steppe Siberian Corps 3rd Ural Corps 4th Eastern Siberian Corps 5th Pri-Amur Corps Separate Armies Western Orenburg Ural People's Army of Komuch Far Eastern Army Zemskaya Rat Holy Cross Druzhina [ ru ] Separate Mongolian-Buryat Cavalry Brigade Asiatic Cavalry Division Czechoslovak Legion Russian Army 5th Polish Division Siberian Fleet Baikal Fleet White Latvian Riflemen North-Western Front Armies North-Western West Russian Volunteer Chudskoe Flotilla [ ru ] Northern Front Northern Army Arctic Ocean Flotilla Middle Asia Armed Forces of South Russia Turkestan Army Caspian Flotilla Turkestan Military Organization Peasant Army of Fergana v t e Russian nationalism History Expansionism , imperialism and Russification 1500–1800 Siberia Khanate of Sibir Central Asia North America Partitions of Poland Crimea, 1783 Amur Zheltuga Republic Yellow Russia Caucasus Military occupations Crimea, 2014 Ukrainian language suppression Slavophilia and westernism Pochvennichestvo Black Hundreds Mladorossy Galician Russophilia White movement Smenovekhovtsy Solidarists 1993 constitutional crisis National Salvation Front Russian marches 2010 Manezhnaya Square riots [ ru ] 2013 Biryulyovo riots 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine Russian invasion of Ukraine Concepts All-Russian nation Collector of Russian lands Emperor of all the Russias Little Russian identity Ethnic nationalism Eurasia Gayrope Holy Rus Moscow, third Rome Nuclear Orthodoxy Of all Rus' [ ru ; uk ] Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and Nationality Orthodoxy or death!

Russia for Russians Russian civilization Russian Idea Russian irredentism Russian-occupied territories Krymnash Russian soul " Russian world " Russophilia and Russophobia United and Indivisible Russia [ ru ; uk ] Ideologies Eurasianism Far-right politics National Bolshevism Neo-Nazism Neo-Sovietism Neo-Stalinism Pan-Slavism Putinism Ruscism Soviet patriotism Modern organizations Active Atomwaffen Division Russland Black Hundreds (1992) Club of Angry Patriots Angry patriots Donetsk Republic Essence of Time Ethnic National Union Eurasia Movement Eurasia Party Eurasian Youth Union Free Donbas Great Russia Liberal Democratic Party of Russia Lithuanian People's Party Narodny Sobor National Socialism / White Power Northern Man Obnovlenie The Other Russia of E. V. Limonov Popular Resistance Association Right Bloc Rodina Russian All-People's Union Russian Community Russian Imperial Movement Russian National Front Russians Russkiy Mir Foundation Serbian Party Oathkeepers Union of Orthodox Banner-Bearers United Russia Young Guard of United Russia Defunct Artpodgotovka Combat Terrorist Organization Congress of Russian Communities Format18 Liberal Democratic Party of the Soviet Union Male State Movement Against Illegal Immigration Nation and Freedom Committee National Bolshevik Party National Russian Liberation Movement National Socialist Society Northern Brotherhood Pamyat People's National Party Russian All-National Union Russian National Socialist Party Russian National Union Russian National Unity New Russian National Unity The Savior Slavic Union Union of the Russian People Personalities After 1991 Viktor Alksnis Sergey Baburin Alexander Barkashov Alexander Belov-Potkin Dmitry Demushkin Aleksandr Dugin Dmitry Galkovsky Aleksandr Ivanov-Sukharevsky Konstantin Kasimovsky Yegor Kholmogorov Konstantin Krylov Vladimir Kvachkov Alexander Lebed Eduard Limonov Vyacheslav Maltsev Maxim Martsinkevich Zakhar Prilepin Vladimir Putin Dmitry Rogozin Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn Igor Shafarevich Dmitri Vasilyev Vladimir Zhirinovsky Gennady Zyuganov Before 1991 Ivan Ilyin Pyotr Krasnov Konstantin Rodzaevsky Mikhail Skobelev Ivan Solonevich Vasily Shulgin Media Fashist The Fourth Political Theory Foundations of Geopolitics History: Fiction or Science?

The Last Will of a Russian Fascist Nash Put' " On the Historical Unity of Russians and Ukrainians " " Rebuilding Russia [ ru ] " " What Russia Should Do with Ukraine " Opposition and criticism Great Russian chauvinism Iazychie Nashism Ruscism Prison of peoples Pobedobesie Vatnik Volos Declaration Category v t e Soviet Union–United States relations Diplomatic posts Embassy Washington D.C.

Soviet Ambassadors Mrs. George Pullman House Moscow US Ambassadors Spaso House Kuybyshev Consulates New York John Hammond House San Francisco Saint Petersburg Vladivostok United Nations Headquarters Representatives Russian Mission Residency Other Elmcroft Estate Killenworth Lothrop Mansion Pioneer Point Diplomacy World War II Summits Declaration of the Four Nations Lend-Lease Lend-Lease Sherman tanks Moscow Conference (1941) Moscow Conference (1942) Moscow Conference (1943) Moscow Conference (1944) Moscow Conference (1945) Potsdam Conference Council of Foreign Ministers Tehran Conference Yalta Conference Cold War Summits 1973 United States–Soviet Union wheat deal Berlin Conference (1954) Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls Council for American–Soviet Trade Dartmouth Conference Eighteen Nation Committee on Disarmament European Advisory Commission Geneva Accords (1988) Geneva Conference (1973) Geneva Summit (1955) Geneva Summit (1985) Glassboro Summit Conference Governors Island Summit Helsinki Summit (1990) Lacy-Zarubin Agreement Madrid Conference Letter Malta Summit Moscow Summit (1972) Moscow Summit (1974) Moscow Summit (1988) Mutual and Balanced Force Reductions NATO Double-Track Decision Reykjavík Summit Stalin Note State visit by Nikita Khrushchev to the United States United Nations Security Council Resolution 135 United States restitution to the Soviet Union US/USSR Acceptance of Law Governing Innocent Passage Vienna Summit Washington Summit (1987) Washington Summit (1973) Vladivostok Summit Meeting on Arms Control Policies Containment Détente Linkage Rollback Stimson Doctrine Welles Declaration Triangular diplomacy Zero Option Speeches 1989 visit by Boris Yeltsin to the United States American University speech And you are lynching Negroes Chicken Kiev speech Evil Empire speech Ich bin ein Berliner Kitchen Debate Kuzma's mother Shoe-banging incident Tear down this wall!

We will bury you Other Pushinka Soviet Military Power publication Historical Relations Russia–United States Russian Empire–United States Treaties and Agreements Arms Control 1990 Chemical Weapons Accord Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty INF McCloy–Zorin Accords Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty SALT I NTM SALT II START I Threshold Test Ban Treaty Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Space Outer Space Treaty Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes Territory Four Power Agreement on Berlin Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany USSR–USA Maritime Boundary Agreement Wanfried agreement World War II Moscow Declarations Potsdam Agreement Other Baruch Plan Bush legs Moscow–Washington hotline U.S.–Soviet Incidents at Sea agreement Legislation Executive Order 8484 Former Soviet Union Demilitarization Act of 1992 FRIENDSHIP Act of 1993 Jackson–Vanik amendment Russian Famine Relief Act Soviet Nuclear Threat Reduction Act of 1991 Science Space APAS Apollo–Soyuz Bion satellites Kosmos 782 Kosmos 936 Kosmos 1129 Kosmos 1514 Kosmos 1667 Kosmos 1887 Kosmos 2044 International Cospas-Sarsat Programme Mir SAGE Space Race TOPAZ-I U.S.–Soviet Space Bridge Yardymly Other International Conference of Laser Applications Shvetsov M-25 Uzel Culture Chess US vs. USSR radio chess match 1945 World Chess Championship 1972 Bobby Fischer Education Anglo-American School of Moscow St. Petersburg Russian Cultural Center Russian Embassy School in Washington, D.C.

Russian Mission School in New York Literature Amerika (magazine) Deep Black Eagles East International Publishers Russian Life Sovfoto The Admiral's Daughter Who's Who in the CIA X Article Radio / Music Ordinary People Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Red Wave Sports 1972 Olympic men's basketball final 1976 Philadelphia Flyers–Red Army game Glasnost Bowl Goodwill Games Miracle on Ice Super Series USA–USSR Track and Field Dual Meet Series TV / Film Free to Be... a Family Soviet submissions for the Academy Award for Best International Feature Film Stalingrad The Extraordinary Adventures of Mr. West in the Land of the Bolsheviks Other American National Exhibition Apollo-Soyuz (cigarette) In Soviet Georgia Soviet Interview Project White Coke Cold War Overview Origins Timeline 1947–1948 1948–1953 1953–1962 1962–1979 1979–1985 1985–1991 Nuclear arms race Space Race Timeline Espionage Americans Soviets Atomic spies Cold War in Asia Operations Operation Anadyr Operation Breakthrough Operation Cedar Operation Chrome Dome Operation Cyclone Operation Denver Operation Dropshot Operation Giant Lance Operation Gold Operation Ivy Bells Operation Keelhaul Operation Lincoln Operation Monopoly Operation RYAN Operation Safe Haven (1957) Operation Shocker Operation Sunrise Projects Project Azorian Project Coldfeet Project Dark Gene Project Genetrix Project Grab Bag Project HOMERUN Project Hula Project Moby Dick Project Mogul Venona project Other 7th Air Escadrille Active Measures Working Group Bomber gap CIA activities in the Soviet Union Cold War tensions and the polio vaccine GIUK gap Missile gap Nitrophenyl pentadienal NSC 68 Plan Totality Red Scare Seven Days to the River Rhine Sheldon names Smolensk Archive SDI The Moscow rules United States aerial reconnaissance of the Soviet Union United States war plans (1945–1950) U.S. Army Field Manual 30-31B Incidents World War II Gorin v. United States Niš incident Cold War 1958 C-130 shootdown incident 1960 RB-47 shootdown incident 1960 U-2 incident 1961 F-84 Thunderstreak incident 1964 T-39 shootdown incident 1980 Summer Olympics boycott 1983 Soviet nuclear false alarm incident 1984 Summer Olympics boycott 1986 Black Sea incident 1988 Black Sea bumping incident Able Archer 83 Autumn Forge 83 Aeroflot Flight 244 Air-to-air combat losses between the Soviet Union and the United States Arrest of Mark Kaminsky and Harvey Bennett Arthur D. Nicholson Berlin Blockade Berlin Crisis of 1958–1959 Berlin Crisis of 1961 Capture of the Tuapse Cuban Missile Crisis Crateology Dymshits–Kuznetsov hijacking affair Feodor Fedorenko Gambell incident Hollow Nickel Case Iran crisis of 1946 John Anthony Walker Karl Linnas Kasenkina Case Korean Air Lines Flight 007 Martin and Mitchell defection Moscow Signal Pan Am Flight 708 Seaboard World Airlines Flight 253A Shostakovich v. Twentieth Century-Fox Film Corp.

Siberian Seven Soviet submarine K-129 Soviet submarine K-219 Sputnik crisis SS Metallurg Anosov Transfermium Wars Turkish Straits crisis United States grain embargo against the Soviet Union Urengoy–Pomary–Uzhhorod pipeline We begin bombing in five minutes Yellow rain Yeniseysk-15 Military relations Russian Revolution American Expeditionary Force, North Russia American Expeditionary Force, Siberia North Russia intervention Siberian intervention United States and the Russian Revolution White movement World War II Allied Control Council Allied Kommandatura Allied technological cooperation during World War II ALSIB Arctic convoys of World War II Belorussia-class cargo ship Berlin Victory Parade of 1945 Elbe Day Four Policemen Line of Contact Northwest Staging Route Pacific Route Persian Corridor Persian Gulf Command SS Dakotan SS Iowan Tripartite Naval Commission USS West Bridge Warsaw airlift Cold War Eisenhower Doctrine Four Power Naval Commission Four-Power Authorities Military liaison missions Reagan Doctrine Truman Doctrine Armaments AG submarines Bell P-63 Kingcobra Comparison of the AK-47 and M16 SS Indigirka Tupolev Tu-4 Tupolev Tu-70 Tupolev Tu-80 USCGC Southwind Organizations Soviet Union Amtorg Trading Corporation Ansonia Clock Company Foundation for Social Inventions Gennady Alferenko Institute for US and Canadian Studies Russian Soviet Government Bureau Soviet Government Purchasing Commission in the U.S.

United States American Committee for the Liberation of the Peoples of Russia Ark Project American Peace Mobilization American Relief Administration American Russian Institute American–Soviet friendship movement American-Soviet Peace Walks Center for Citizen Initiatives Communist Party USA Dewey Commission Freedom Sunday for Soviet Jews Friends of Soviet Russia Friendship Flight '89 Friendship Flight (Alaska Airlines) Fund for Armenian Relief Kennan Institute Kersten Committee National Committee for a Free Europe National Council of American–Soviet Friendship Organization for Jewish Colonization in Russia Russian-American Industrial Corporation Russian War Relief Society for Technical Aid to Soviet Russia Student Struggle for Soviet Jewry U.S. Commission on the Ukraine Famine U.S. Peace Council Related Baltic Freedom Day Captive Nations Captive Nations Week GAZ Georgi Bolshakov Little Joe New world order (politics) Refusenik Roswell Garst Samantha Smith Self-propelled barge T-36 Sisson Documents Sovereignty of Puerto Rico during the Cold War Suzanne Massie Category:Soviet Union–United States relations v t e Russian Empire–United States relations Diplomatic posts Embassy Washington D.C.

Russian Empire Ambassadors Mrs. George Pullman House Saint Petersburg US Ambassadors Consulates Chicago Honolulu New York Philadelphia Portland San Francisco Seattle Odesa Saint Petersburg Vladivostok Diplomacy Treaties Russo-American Treaty of 1824 Treaty of Portsmouth Policies Open Door Policy Other Russia and the American Revolution Historical relations Russia–United States Soviet Union–United States Land Territory Alaska Purchase Russian colonization of North America Ukase of 1821 Places Castle Hill Fort Ross Mission San Francisco Solano Russian Bishop's House Trade British North America California fur rush Maritime fur trade Russia Wharf Buildings Russian-American Company Shelikhov-Golikov Company Ukase of 1799 Science Russian–American Telegraph Organizations Society of Friends of Russian Freedom Military relations Alliances Eight-Nation Alliance First League of Armed Neutrality Russian Revolution American Expeditionary Force, North Russia American Expeditionary Force, Siberia North Russia intervention Siberian intervention United States and the Russian Revolution White movement Armaments AG submarines H-class submarines USS H-4 USS H-5 USS H-6 USS H-7 USS H-8 Russian frigate Alexander Nevsky Uragan -class monitor USS Rogday Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐htbzv
Cached time: 20250818054426
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.336 seconds
Real time usage: 1.627 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13720/1000000
Revision size: 59818/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 520623/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 39158/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 53/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 228134/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.660/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27386190/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1179.233      1 -total
 25.20%  297.225      2 Template:Reflist
 16.52%  194.822      1 Template:Infobox_militant_organization
 16.22%  191.291      1 Template:Infobox
 13.62%  160.565     24 Template:Navbox
 11.25%  132.684      5 Template:Efn
 10.29%  121.378      1 Template:Lang-rus
 10.06%  118.637      9 Template:Cite_web
  9.38%  110.580      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.34%  110.139     23 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:395296:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818054426 and revision id 1306522815. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=White_movement&oldid=1306522815 " Categories : White movement Anti-communism in Russia Antisemitism in Russia Anti-communist organizations Conservatism in Russia Nationalist movements in Asia Nationalist movements in Europe Pan-Slavism Russian Civil War Russian nationalism Russian nationalist organizations Reactionary Anti-Ukrainian sentiment in Russia Anti-Jewish pogroms of the Russian Civil War Defunct conservative parties Hidden categories: Articles containing Russian-language text Pages with Russian IPA Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1: unfit URL CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from August 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 Articles containing Finnish-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Russian-language sources (ru) Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2010 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 05:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents White movement 47 languages Add topic

