Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Authorship 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents On Breath 4 languages Íslenska 日本語 Português Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia On Breath ( Greek : Περὶ πνεύματος; Latin : De spiritu ) is a philosophical treatise included in the Corpus Aristotelicum but usually regarded as spurious.  Its opening sentence raises the question: "What is the mode of growth, and the mode of maintenance, of the natural (or 'connate': emphutos ) vital spirit ( pneuma )?" Authorship [ edit ] Among the ancient catalogues of Aristotle 's works, a work On Breath (but in three books, not one) is listed only by Ptolemy-el-Garib , and Pliny the Elder ( N.H.

XI.220) and Galen ( De simpl. med. temp. et fac.

V.9) are the first authors who appear to make reference to the treatise we possess.

[ 1 ] In modern times, its authenticity has been virtually unanimously rejected, although most or all of it has been acknowledged to be an early work of the Peripatetic school , possibly connected with Theophrastus , Strato of Lampsacus , or Erasistratus , and shedding light on Hellenistic medicine .

[ 2 ] In 2008, however, Bos and Ferwerda published a commentary in which they maintain that On Breath is a genuine work of Aristotle whose doctrines respond to those of Plato 's Timaeus and constitute an important part of Aristotle's philosophy of nature.  They list a number of positions that On Breath defends such as that fish don't breathe because there is no air in water that Aristotle is known to have held.

[ 3 ] They also consider the position on the soul to be that of Aristotle.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Notes [ edit ] ^ Roselli, p. 13 ^ Roselli, pp. 17ff. with nn. 17–20 ^ Aristotle, on the life bearing Spirit (De Spiritu) p18-19 ^ Aristotle, on the life bearing Spirit (De Spiritu) p18-19 References [ edit ] Commentaries Daniel Furlanus, Theophrasti Eresii, Peripateticorum post Aristotelem principis pleraque...

(Greek text with Latin translation and commentary), Hanover, 1605 ( available online ).

Amneris Roselli, [Aristotele]: De spiritu (Greek text with Italian translation and commentary), Pisa: ETS Editrice, 1992.

Abraham P. Bos and Rein Ferwerda, Aristotle, On the Life-Bearing Spirit (De Spiritu) : A Discussion with Plato and his Predecessors on Pneuma as the Instrumental Body of the Soul (with English translation and commentary), Leiden: Brill, 2008.

External links [ edit ] English translation: J. F. Dobson's 1914 Oxford translation bound with De Mundo , pp.

"32" ff. (archive.org) Greek text: Werner Jaeger 's 1913 Teubner text available in HTML format via Greco interattivo De Spiritu , translated by J. F. Dobson (Sharper Scan of 1931 Edition) On Breath public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal This article about a philosophy -related book is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=On_Breath&oldid=1145177302 " Categories : Works by Aristotle Philosophy book stubs Hidden categories: Articles with LibriVox links All stub articles This page was last edited on 17 March 2023, at 17:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents On Breath 4 languages Add topic

