Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Benedetto Castelli 18 languages বাংলা Беларуская Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Magyar Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian mathematician (1578–1643) Dom Benedetto Castelli O.S.B.

Born 1578 Brescia , Republic of Venice Died 9 April 1643 (1643-04-09) (aged 64–65) Rome , Papal States Alma mater University of Padua Title abbot Scientific career Fields Mathematician Institutions University of Pisa Academic advisors Galileo Galilei Notable students Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Evangelista Torricelli Bonaventura Cavalieri Antonio Nardi Raffaello Magiotti Benedetto Castelli O.S.B.

(1578 – 9 April 1643), born Antonio Castelli , was an Italian mathematician. Benedetto was his name in religion on entering the Benedictine Order in 1595.

Life [ edit ] Born in Brescia , Castelli studied at the University of Padua and later became an abbot at the Benedictine monastery in Monte Cassino .

He was a long-time friend and supporter of his teacher, Galileo Galilei , and in turn, he was a teacher to Galileo's son . He assisted Galileo's study of sunspots and participated in the examination of the theories of Nicolaus Copernicus . Castelli was interested in mathematics and hydraulics . He was appointed as a mathematician to the University of Pisa , replacing Galileo, and later at the University of Rome La Sapienza . Castelli introduced Bonaventura Cavalieri to Galileo, leading to extensive correspondence between the latter; Galileo was instrumental in procuring a position for Cavalieri at the University of Bologna in 1629.

Castelli was involved in the discovery of the phases of Venus : In December 1610, Galileo received a letter from Castelli, asking if the phases of Venus were observable through Galileo's new telescope.

[ 1 ] Days later, Galileo wrote in a letter to Johannes Kepler saying that he'd observed Venus going through phases, but took complete credit for himself. It is unclear, lacking copies of any earlier correspondence, whether Castelli was telling Galileo of it for the first time, or responding to Galileo having previously informed him of it.

[ 2 ] Castelli died in Rome . His students included Giovanni Alfonso Borelli , Raffaello Magiotti , Antonio Nardi , and Evangelista Torricelli , the inventor of the barometer and an early proponent of the air pump . He recommended Gasparo Berti for a chair of mathematics at Sapienza. Berti was to be his successor at the university, but he died before he could take the post.

Works [ edit ] Opuscoli filosofici , Brescia, 1669 He published Mensuration of Running Water , an important work on fluids in motion, and then his Geometrical Demonstrations of the Measure of Running Waters in which the publishing notes described him as Abbot of San Benedetto Aloysio and Mathematician to Pope Urban VIII , once a supporter of his mentor, Galileo.

He dedicated both publications to "the most Illustrious, and most Excellent Prince" Taddeo Barberini , a nephew of Pope Urban VIII.

[ 3 ] Benedetto Castelli (1661) [1628].

Della misura delle acque correnti (in Italian). London: William Leybourn.

Castelli, Benedetto (1669).

Alcuni opuscoli filosofici . Brescia.

Castelli, Benedetto (1639).

Discorso sopra la calamita .

Benedetto Castelli, Galileo Galilei , Archimedes , Giovanni Alfonso Borelli , Evangelista Torricelli , Vincenzo Viviani Opuscoli idraulici , Bologna, Tipografia Marsigli, 1822.

Risposta alle opposizioni del signor Lodovico delle Colombe e del signor Vincenzio di Grazia, contro al trattato del signor Galileo Galilei, delle cose che stanno su l'acqua, o che in quella si muovono (in Italian). Firenze: Cosimo Giunta. 1615.

See also [ edit ] List of Roman Catholic scientist-clerics Letter to Benedetto Castelli References [ edit ] ^ Blåsjö, Viktor (2 June 2019).

"Phases of Venus" .

intellectualmathematics.com . Archived from the original on 7 December 2023 . Retrieved 21 May 2024 .

^ Wilkins, John S. (9 June 2014).

"The Phases of Venus and Heliocentricity: A Rough Guide. The Renaissance Mathematicus" .

thonyc.wordpress.com . Archived from the original on 18 March 2024 . Retrieved 21 May 2024 .

^ "Archimedes Texts - Castelli" . Archived from the original on 16 July 2011 . Retrieved 3 July 2010 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Benedetto Castelli at Wikimedia Commons " Galileo Galilei, Letter to Benedetto Castelli (1613) ", Religion and Science . ( Source of the English translation .) The Galileo Correspondence Project at Stanford University Archived 2018-07-19 at the Wayback Machine Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Benedetto_Castelli&oldid=1268060435 " Categories : 1578 births 1643 deaths Scientists from Brescia 16th-century Italian mathematicians 17th-century Italian mathematicians Italian Benedictines Academic staff of the Sapienza University of Rome University of Padua alumni University of Pisa alumni Catholic clergy scientists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2024 Articles with hCards Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 8 January 2025, at 00:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Benedetto Castelli 18 languages Add topic

