Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical precedents 2 Crop circles 3 See also 4 References and footnotes 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Crop art 2 languages فارسی Српски / srpski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Environmental art using plant matter The Corn Palace (detail of panel), Mitchell, South Dakota Crop art is an environmental art practice using plants and seeds in the landscape to create statements, marks and/or images.

Agnes Denes , Matthew Moore (artist), Dennis Oppenheim and Stan Herd are practitioners of Crop art.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Some works of Land art , and Earth art are similar in scale, and can be seen only from aerial viewpoints.

Historical precedents [ edit ] Linda Paulsen demonstrates making seed art at the Minnesota State Fair Tournament of Roses parade, New Orleans float One folk art version of crop art is called seed art , a visual art form created in mosaic -style, similar to the technique of pointillism in painting, or needlepoint textiles. Seed mosaic images are created by fixing vegetable matter , especially seeds , to a background. Coleen Sheehy, [ 5 ] in Seed Queen quotes a classic text on the subject: Decorating with Seed mosaics, Chipped Glass and Plant materials (first pub.1960)  by Elenor Van Rennslaer [ 6 ] "...mosaics are tiles, glass, or stones set in mortar. Instead of these you can create a different kind of mosaic using such plant materials as seeds, tiny pods, and flowers" (Sheehy 49).
An example is the Corn Palace of Mitchell, South Dakota, that was first built for the  1892 Corn Exposition. Outer walls of the building were -and still are-  covered in murals made from multi-colored ears of corn (Sheehy 24)  The seed mosaic portraits by Lillian Colton are also examples. Her seed portraits of celebrities were exhibited in the strictly defined "Crop art" category at the Minnesota State Fair beginning in 1966. Rules for entry of Crop art allow "only seeds from Minnesota-grown farm crops or cultivated garden flowers, fruits, and vegetables" with no wild plant seeds permitted. Colton continued to teach and make Crop art until her death at age 97 in 2007 (Sheehy 2). A new generation of Crop, or Seed artists, known as the  "Postmodern School of Minnesota Crop Art" (Sheehy 90) is continuing this folk tradition. Some of these artists are "Cathy Camper, Alan Carpenter, Kim Cope, Linda Koutsky, Nancy Loung, Suzy Mears, Laura Melnick, and David Steinlicht" (Sheehy 90). There is a custodial aspect and preservation ethic associated with this plant-based art form.

[ citation needed ] Making Crop art is not only a way preserving and rejuvenating a vibrant folk craft but its practice foregrounds the need to collect, store, and value the lore and varieties of seeds.

[ citation needed ] In Los Angeles, the Tournament of Roses Parade floats employ the flowers of plants in a similar collage or mosaic style.

Crop circles [ edit ] The term crop art might be used to describe formations known as crop circles .

[ 7 ] Crop circles first came to mass media attention during  the 1980s after they were noticed in some agricultural fields in southern England (Ency Rel/Spir). Most often the images consist of very large and intricate series of rings and lines formed when standing crops, such as wheat and rye are flattened into patterns. Some attribute these designs to the marks left by landings of extraterrestrial craft because the images are usually very large, appear over a short period of time, and some do not show any visible tracks into or out of the design. These same type of figures are found all over the world; though many do not attribute their manifestation to  visitations by alien beings. Crop circles  are sometimes called crop formations, agroglyphs, or pictograms . Some are also created by recognized "landscape artists" for commercial purposes.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Seed Savers Exchange References and footnotes [ edit ] ^ Pollack, Maika.

"Interview: Agnes Denes" . Interview Magazine . Retrieved 15 August 2017 .

^ Vanesian, Kathleen (January 13, 2010).

"Food for Thought: Artist Matthew Moore to Show Work at 2010 Sundance Film Festival" . Phoenix New Times . Retrieved 15 August 2017 .

^ "Dennis Oppenheim: Directed Seeding - Cancelled Crop 1969" . Tate Museum . Retrieved 15 August 2017 .

^ Crop Art and Other Earthworks.

Stan Herd. New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 1994 ^ Seed Queen by  Coleen Sheehy, Minnesota Historical Society Press: St. Paul, MN, 2007 ^ Eleanor Van Rennslaer Decorating with Seed mosaics, Chipped Glass and Plant materials Kessinger Publishing, LLC (July 23, 2009) ^ a b "Crop Circles." Encyclopedia of Religious and Spiritual Development. 2005.  SAGE Publications. 20 Nov. 2009. < http://www.sage-ereference.com/religion/Article_n57.html Archived 2012-09-09 at archive.today >. Eltjo H. Haselhoff External links [ edit ] Crop Art Seed Mosaic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Crop_art&oldid=1303997708 " Categories : Visual arts media Environmental art Hidden categories: Webarchive template archiveis links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2017 This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 09:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Crop art 2 languages Add topic

