Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Meanings and definitions Toggle Meanings and definitions subsection 1.1 Etymology 1.2 Semantics and usage 2 Companies around the world Toggle Companies around the world subsection 2.1 Canada 2.2 China 2.3 Germany 2.4 Japan 2.5 Russia 2.6 United Kingdom 2.7 United States 3 Types 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Company 84 languages Afrikaans العربية Armãneashti Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština الدارجة Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gaelg ગુજરાતી 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски मराठी Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Patois Polski Qaraqalpaqsha Română Runa Simi Русский Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 West-Vlams 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Betawi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Association or collection of individuals For other uses, see Company (disambiguation) .

"Firm" redirects here. For other uses, see Firm (disambiguation) .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( July 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A modern corporate office building in Münster , North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany This article is part of a series on Corporate law By jurisdiction Anguilla Australia BVI Canada Cayman Islands India South Africa UK United States Vietnam European Union France Germany General corporate forms Company Conglomerate Cooperative Corporation Holding company Joint-stock Partnership General Limited Limited liability Private limited Shell corporation Shelf corporation Sole proprietorship Corporate forms by jurisdiction European Union Societas (SE) Societas cooperativa (SCE) Societas privata (SPE) Societas unius personae (SUP) Economic interest grouping (EEIG) UK / Ireland / Commonwealth Charitable incorporated organisation (England and Wales) (CIO) Scottish charitable incorporated organisation (SCIO) Community interest company (CIC) Industrial and provident society (IPS) Limited company (Ltd.) by guarantee by shares proprietary public Unlimited company United States Benefit corporation C corporation Limited liability company (LLC) Low-profit LLC Series LLC Limited liability limited partnership (LLLP) S corporation Delaware corporation / statutory trust Massachusetts business trust Nevada corporation Others Aktiebolag (AB) Aktiengesellschaft (AG) Ansvarlig selskap (ANS) Aktieselskab (A/S) Aksjeselskap (AS) Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung (GmbH) Kabushiki gaisha (K.K.) Naamloze vennootschap (N.V.) Osakeyhtiö (Oy) S.A.

Sociedad de responsabilidad limitada (S.R.L.) Société à responsabilité limitée (SARL) more...

Doctrines Business judgment rule Corporate governance De facto and estoppel corporations Internal affairs doctrine Limited liability Tag-along right Drag-along right Piercing the corporate veil Rochdale Principles Ultra vires Related areas Beneficial ownership Civil procedure Contract Corporate registers Registered agent Company portal Law portal v t e Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e An office building of Nokia Corporation in Hervanta , Tampere, Finland A company , abbreviated as co.

, is a legal entity representing an association of legal people, whether natural , juridical or a mixture of both, with a specific objective. Company members share a common purpose and unite to achieve specific, declared goals.

Over time, companies have evolved to have the following features: "separate legal personality, limited liability, transferable shares, investor ownership, and a managerial hierarchy".

[ 1 ] The company, as an entity, was created by the state which granted the privilege of incorporation.

[ 1 ] Companies take various forms, such as: voluntary associations , which may include nonprofit organizations business entities , whose aim is to generate sales , revenue , and profit financial entities and banks programs or educational institutions A company can be created as a legal person so that the company itself has limited liability as members perform or fail to discharge their duties according to the publicly declared incorporation published policy. When a company closes, it may need to be liquidated to avoid further legal obligations. Companies may associate and collectively register themselves as new companies; the resulting entities are often known as corporate groups , collections of parent and subsidiary corporations.

Meanings and definitions [ edit ] A company can be defined as an "artificial person", invisible, intangible, created by or under law, [ 2 ] with a discrete legal capacity (or "personality"), perpetual succession , and a common seal . Except for some senior positions, companies remain unaffected by the death, insanity, or insolvency of an individual member.

Etymology [ edit ] The English word, " company ", has its origins in the Old French term compagnie (first recorded in 1150), meaning "society, friendship, intimacy; body of soldiers", [ 3 ] which came from the Late Latin word companio ("one who eats bread with you"), first attested in the Salic law ( c.

AD 500) as a calque of the Germanic expression gahlaibo (literally, "with bread"), related to Old High German galeipo ("companion") and to Gothic gahlaiba ("messmate").

Semantics and usage [ edit ] By 1303, the word company referred to trade guilds .

[ 4 ] The usage of the term company to mean "business association" was first recorded in 1553, [ 5 ] and the abbreviation "co." dates from 1769.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Companies around the world [ edit ] The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with Western culture and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new section, as appropriate.

( June 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Canada [ edit ] Companies in Canada can be incorporated at the federal or provincial level under the Canada Business Corporations Act or equivalent provincial statutes.

[ 8 ] China [ edit ] According to the Company Law of the People's Republic of China , companies include limited liability companies and joint-stock limited companies which were founded in mainland China.

Germany [ edit ] In Germany, the most common corporate forms include the Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung and the Aktiengesellschaft . The GmbH is a private limited liability company, widely used for small and medium-sized enterprises. The AG is a public limited company used by larger firms and those listed on stock exchanges. German corporate law is governed by the Handelsgesetzbuch . Companies must register with the local commercial register and comply with strict disclosure and accounting standards.

[ 9 ] Japan [ edit ] Japanese company law recognizes several types of companies, with the most common being the Kabushiki Kaisha , similar to a joint-stock company. Another popular form is the Gōdō Kaisha , which resembles a limited liability company. The Companies Act of 2005 established the legal framework for these and other business entities in Japan, regulating their formation, governance, and operation.

[ 10 ] Russia [ edit ] In Russia, companies are governed by the Civil Code and federal laws such as the Law on Joint-Stock Companies and the Law on Limited Liability Companies. Common types of corporate entities include the Open Joint-Stock Company, the Closed Joint-Stock Company, and the Limited Liability Company.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] See also: List of companies of the United Kingdom In English law and in legal jurisdictions based upon it, a company is a body corporate or corporation company registered under the Companies Acts or under similar legislation.

[ 14 ] Common forms include: Private companies limited by guarantee Community interest company Charitable incorporated organisation Private companies limited by shares - the most common form of company Public limited companies - companies, usually large, which are permitted to (but do not have to) offer their shares to the public, for example on a stock exchange In the United Kingdom, a partnership is not legally a company, but may sometimes be referred to (informally) as a "company". It may be referred to as a "firm" .

United States [ edit ] See also: List of companies of the United States by state In the United States , a company is not necessarily a corporation. For example, a company may be a " corporation , partnership , association, joint-stock company , trust , fund , or organized group of persons , whether incorporated or not, and (in an official capacity) any receiver, trustee in bankruptcy, or similar official, or liquidating agent , for any of the foregoing".

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Types [ edit ] For a country-by-country listing, see types of business entity .

See also: Business § Forms A company limited by guarantee (CLG): Commonly used where companies are formed for non-commercial purposes, such as clubs or charities. The members guarantee the payment of certain (usually nominal) amounts if the company goes into insolvent liquidation , but otherwise, they have no economic rights in relation to the company. This type of company is common in England . A company limited by guarantee may be with or without having share capital .

A company limited by shares : The most common form of the company used for business ventures. Specifically, a limited company is a "company in which the liability of each shareholder is limited to the amount individually invested" with corporations being "the most common example of a limited company".

[ 16 ] This type of company is common in England and many English-speaking countries . A company limited by shares may be a publicly traded company or a privately held company .

A company limited by guarantee with a share capital: A hybrid entity, usually used where the company is formed for non-commercial purposes, but the activities of the company are partly funded by investors who expect a return. This type of company may no longer be formed in the UK, although provisions still exist in law for them to exist.

[ 14 ] A limited liability company : "A company—statutorily authorized in certain states—that is characterized by limited liability, management by members or managers, and limitations on ownership transfer", i.e., L.L.C.

[ 16 ] LLC structure has been called "hybrid" in that it "combines the characteristics of a corporation and of a partnership or sole proprietorship ". Like a corporation, it has limited liability for members of the company, and like a partnership it has "flow-through taxation to the members" and depending on local laws may have to be "dissolved upon the death or bankruptcy of a member".

[ 17 ] An unlimited company with or without a share capital : A hybrid entity, a company where the liability of members or shareholders for the debts (if any) of the company are not limited. In this case, the doctrine of a veil of incorporation does not apply.

[ citation needed ] Less common types of companies are: Companies formed by letters patent : Most corporations by letters patent are corporations sole and not companies as the term is commonly understood today.

Royal charter corporations : In middle-ages Europe, before the passing of modern companies legislation, these were the only types of companies.

[ citation needed ] Now they are relatively rare, except for very old companies that still survive (particularly many British banks), or modern societies that fulfill a quasi-regulatory function (for example, the Bank of England is a corporation formed by a modern charter).

[ citation needed ] Statutory companies : Relatively rare today, certain companies have been formed by a private statute passed in the relevant jurisdiction.

[ citation needed ] When "Ltd" is placed after the company's name, it signifies a limited company, and "PLC" ( public limited company ) indicates that its shares are widely held.

[ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Business and economics portal Companies portal Corporate personhood List of company registers List of largest employers Lists of companies Types of business entity References [ edit ] ^ a b Turner, John D. (January 30, 2024).

"Three centuries of corporate governance in the United Kingdom" .

The Economic History Review .

78 : 3– 29.

doi : 10.1111/ehr.13326 .

ISSN 0013-0117 .

^ Compare a definition of a corporation: "Perhaps the best definition of a corporation was given by Chief Justice John Marshall in a famous Supreme Court decision in 1819.  A corporation, he said, 'is an artificial person, invisible, intangible, and existing only in contemplation of the law.'  In other words, a corporation [...] is an artificial person, created by law, with most of the legal rights of a real person." Pride, William M.; Hughes, Robert J.; Kapoor, Jack R. (1985). "4: Choosing a form of business ownership".

Business . CengageNOW Series (10 ed.). Mason, Ohio: Cengage Learning (published 2009). p. 116.

ISBN 9780324829556 . Retrieved April 20, 2019 .

^ 12th century: Harper, Douglas.

"company" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ Compare: Harper, Douglas.

"company" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

- '[...] the word having been used in reference to trade guilds from late 14c.' ^ Compare: Harper, Douglas.

"company" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

- 'From late 14c. as "a number of persons united to perform or carry out anything jointly," which developed a commercial sense of "business association" by 1550s, the word having been used in reference to trade guilds from late 14c.' ^ Compare: "co" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) - "1759   Compl. Let.-writer (ed. 6)    London: Printed for Stanley Crowder, and Co." ^ Compare: Harper, Douglas.

"co" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

- 'by 1670's as an abbreviation of company in the business sense, indicating the partners in the firm whose names do not appear in its name. Hence and co. to indicate "the rest" of any group (1757)'.

^ Government of Canada, Innovation (July 4, 2016).

"Corporations Canada" .

ised-isde.canada.ca . Retrieved July 7, 2025 .

^ portal, Legal knowledge (August 2, 2016).

"GmbH or AG - what are the differences?" .

TELFA . Retrieved July 7, 2025 .

^ muazzam (September 26, 2023).

"Understanding the Difference between Kabushiki Kaisha (K.K.) and Godo Kaisha (G.K.) in Japan" .

HLS Japan . Retrieved July 7, 2025 .

^ "Legal Forms of Companies in Russia" .

Federal Tax Service of Russia . Retrieved July 7, 2025 .

^ "New regulations on Russian joint stock companies | Global law firm | Norton Rose Fulbright" .

www.nortonrosefulbright.com/en-in . Retrieved July 7, 2025 .

^ lawyersrussia.com (September 13, 2024).

"Commercial Code in Russia" .

Lawyers in Russia . Retrieved July 7, 2025 .

^ a b "Companies Act 2006" .

www.legislation.gov.uk .

Archived from the original on April 10, 2015 . Retrieved March 15, 2020 .

^ Garner, Bryan A.

, ed. (1891). "company".

Black's Law Dictionary . Black's Law, 9th Edition. Vol. 1 (9 ed.). St. Paul, Minnesota: West Publishing, Inc (published 2009). p. 318.

ISBN 9780314199492 . Retrieved April 20, 2019 .

2. A corporation, partnership, association, joint-stock company, trust, fund, or organized group of persons, whether incorporated or not, and (in an official capacity) any receiver, trustee in bankruptcy, or similar official, or liquidating agent , for any of the foregoing. Investment Company Act 2(a)(8)(15 USCA 80a-2(a)(8)).

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) [ permanent dead link ] ^ a b c Black's Law Dictionary . Second Pocket Edition. Bryan A. Garner, editor. West. 2001.

^ root.

"Limited Liability Company (LLC) Definition - Investopedia" .

Investopedia .

Archived from the original on November 27, 2012 . Retrieved November 14, 2012 .

^ "BBC Bitesize - GCSE Business - Forms of business ownership - Revision 3" .

BBC Bitesize .

Archived from the original on September 1, 2018 . Retrieved August 31, 2018 .

Further reading [ edit ] Alan Dignam and John Lowry.

Company Law . Oxford: Oxford University Press , 2020.

ISBN 978-0-19-928936-3 .

John Micklethwait and Adrian Wooldridge , The Company: A Short History of a Revolutionary Idea . New York: Modern Library, 2003.

"Company" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). 1911. pp.

795– 803.

External links [ edit ] Look up Company in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Companies .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Companies .

"Labor and Employment" .

Government Information Library . University of Colorado at Boulder. Archived from the original on June 12, 2009 . Retrieved August 5, 2009 .

"Get Information About a Company" . Gov.UK.

Authority control databases National Germany Japan Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐vl7xg
Cached time: 20250816120228
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.717 seconds
Real time usage: 0.861 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4604/1000000
Revision size: 17009/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 139346/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6852/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 20/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 112430/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.455/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21444627/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  719.468      1 -total
 29.10%  209.385      1 Template:Reflist
 15.81%  113.756      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.80%   92.113      1 Template:Companies_law
 11.79%   84.827     15 Template:Cite_web
 11.08%   79.716      5 Template:Lang
  9.72%   69.966      1 Template:Cite_journal
  7.84%   56.439      1 Template:Short_description
  6.33%   45.521      1 Template:Authority_control
  6.21%   44.669      1 Template:Sidebar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4918223:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816120228 and revision id 1306189077. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Company&oldid=1306189077 " Categories : Legal entities Companies Corporations Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from July 2023 All articles lacking in-text citations Use mdy dates from March 2020 Articles containing Old French (842-ca. 1400)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Old Frankish-language text Articles containing Old High German (ca. 750-1050)-language text Articles containing Gothic-language text Articles with limited geographic scope from June 2019 Western culture-centric All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 11:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Company 84 languages Add topic

