Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Description Toggle Description subsection 2.1 Characteristics 2.2 Hard and soft commodities 3 Commoditization 4 Global commodities trading company 5 Commodity trade 6 Inventory data 7 Commodification of labour 8 Commodity super cycle Toggle Commodity super cycle subsection 8.1 History of super cycles 9 See also 10 Notes 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Commodity 46 languages العربية বাংলা Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Runa Simi Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Tiếng Việt ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fungible item produced to satisfy wants or needs For goods and services that are the object of exchange, see Commodity (Marxism) .

For other uses, see Commodity (disambiguation) .

Yerba mate (left), coffee bean (middle) and tea (right), all used for caffeinated infusions, are commodity cash crops .

Business administration Accounting Management accounting Financial accounting Audit Business entity ( list ) Corporate group Corporation sole Company Conglomerate Holding company Cooperative Corporation Joint-stock company Limited liability company Partnership Privately held company Sole proprietorship State-owned enterprise Corporate governance Annual general meeting Board of directors Supervisory board Advisory board Audit committee Corporate law Commercial law Constitutional documents Contract Corporate crime Corporate liability Insolvency law International trade law Mergers and acquisitions Corporate title Chairman Chief business officer / Chief brand officer Chief executive officer / Chief operating officer Chief financial officer Chief human resources officer Chief information officer / Chief marketing officer Chief product officer / Chief technology officer Economics Commodity Public economics Labour economics Development economics International economics Mixed economy Planned economy Econometrics Environmental economics Open economy Market economy Knowledge economy Microeconomics Macroeconomics Economic development Economic statistics Finance Financial statement Insurance Factoring Cash conversion cycle Insider dealing Capital budgeting Commercial bank Derivative Financial statement analysis Financial risk Public finance Corporate finance Managerial finance International finance Liquidation Stock market Financial market Tax Financial institution Capital management Venture capital Types of management Asset Brand Business intelligence Business development Capacity Capability Change innovation Commercial Marketing Communications Configuration Conflict Content Customer relationship Distributed Earned value Electronic business Enterprise resource planning management information system Financial Human resource development Incident Knowledge Legal Materials Network administrator Office Operations services Performance Power Process Product life-cycle Product Project Property Quality Records Resource Risk crisis Sales Security Service Strategic Supply chain Systems administrator Talent Technology Organization Architecture Behavior Communication Culture Conflict Development Engineering Hierarchy Patterns Space Structure Trade Business analysis Business ethics Business plan Business judgment rule Consumer behaviour International business Business model International trade Trade route Business process Business statistics Business and economics portal v t e In economics , a commodity is an economic good , usually a resource , that specifically has full or substantial fungibility : that is, the market treats instances of the good as equivalent or nearly so with no regard to who produced them.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] The price of a commodity good is typically determined as a function of its market as a whole: well-established physical commodities have actively traded spot and derivative markets. The wide availability of commodities typically leads to smaller profit margins and diminishes the importance of factors (such as brand name ) other than price.

Most commodities are raw materials , basic resources, agricultural , or mining products, such as iron ore , sugar , or grains like rice and wheat . Commodities can also be mass-produced unspecialized products such as chemicals and computer memory . Popular commodities include crude oil , corn , and gold .

Other definitions of commodity include something useful or valued [ 4 ] and an alternative term for an economic good or service available for purchase in the market.

[ 5 ] In such standard works as Alfred Marshall 's Principles of Economics (1920) [ 6 ] and Léon Walras 's Elements of Pure Economics ([1926] 1954) [ 7 ] 'commodity' serves as general term for an economic good or service.

Etymology [ edit ] The word commodity came into use in English in the 15th century, from the French commodité , "amenity, convenience". Going further back, the French word derives from the Latin commoditas , meaning "suitability, convenience, advantage". The Latin word commodus (from which English gets other words including commodious and accommodate ) meant variously "appropriate", "proper measure, time, or condition", and "advantage, benefit".

Description [ edit ] Characteristics [ edit ] In economics, the term commodity is used specifically for economic goods that have full or partial but substantial fungibility ; that is, the market treats their instances as equivalent or nearly so with no regard to who produced them.

[ 1 ] Karl Marx described this property as follows: "From the taste of wheat , it is not possible to tell who produced it, a Russian serf , a French peasant or an English capitalist ." [ 8 ] Petroleum and copper are examples of commodity goods: [ 9 ] their supply and demand are a part of one universal market.

Non-commodity items such as stereo systems have many aspects of product differentiation , such as the brand , the user interface and the perceived quality. The demand for one type of stereo may be much larger than demand for another.

The price of a commodity good is typically determined as a function of its market as a whole. Well-established physical commodities have actively traded spot and derivative markets.

Hard and soft commodities [ edit ] World exports of cereals by main commodities Soft commodities are goods that are grown, such as wheat , or rice .

Hard commodities are mined . Examples include gold , silver , helium , oil .

Energy commodities include electricity, gas, coal and oil. Electricity has the particular characteristic that it is usually uneconomical to store, and must therefore be consumed as soon as it is produced.

Commoditization [ edit ] Main article: Commoditization Commoditization occurs as a goods or services market loses differentiation across its supply base, often by the diffusion of the intellectual capital necessary to acquire or produce it efficiently. As such, goods that formerly carried premium margins for market participants have become commodities, such as generic pharmaceuticals and DRAM chips . An article in The New York Times cites multivitamin supplements as an example of commoditization; a 50 mg tablet of calcium is of equal value to a consumer no matter what company produces and markets it, and as such, multivitamins are now sold in bulk and are available at any supermarket with little brand differentiation.

[ 10 ] Following this trend, nanomaterials are emerging from carrying premium profit margins for market participants to a status of commodification.

[ 11 ] There is a spectrum of commoditization, rather than a binary distinction of "commodity versus differentiable product". Few products have complete undifferentiability and hence fungibility; even electricity can be differentiated in the market based on its method of generation (e.g., fossil fuel, wind, solar), in markets where energy choice lets a buyer opt (and pay more) for renewable methods if desired. Many products' degree of commoditization depends on the buyer's mentality and means. For example, milk, eggs, and notebook paper are not differentiated by many customers; for them, the product is fungible and lowest price is the main decisive factor in the purchasing choice. Other customers take into consideration other factors besides price, such as environmental sustainability and animal welfare. To these customers, distinctions such as " organic versus not" or " cage free versus not" count toward differentiating brands of milk or eggs, and percentage of recycled content or Forest Stewardship Council certification count toward differentiating brands of notebook paper.

Global commodities trading company [ edit ] This is a list of companies trading globally in commodities, descending by size as of October 28, 2011.

[ 12 ] Vitol Glencore Trafigura Cargill Salam Investment Archer Daniels Midland Gunvor (company) Mercuria Energy Group Noble Group Louis Dreyfus Group Bunge Limited Wilmar International Olam International Commodity trade [ edit ] Main articles: Futures exchange and Commodity market In the original and simplified sense, commodities were things of value, of uniform quality, that were produced in large quantities by many different producers; the items from each different producer were considered equivalent. On a commodity exchange, it is the underlying standard stated in the contract that defines the commodity, not any quality inherent in a specific producer's product.

Commodities exchanges include: Bourse Africa (formerly GBOT) Bursa Malaysia Derivatives (MDEX) Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) Dalian Commodity Exchange (DCE) Euronext.liffe ( LIFFE ) Kansas City Board of Trade (KCBT) London Metal Exchange (LME) Marché à Terme International de France (MATIF) Mercantile Exchange Nepal Limited (MEX) Multi Commodity Exchange (MCX) National Commodity and Derivatives Exchange (NCDEX) National Commodity Exchange Limited (NCEL) New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) Yiwu International Trade City (Yiwu Market) Markets for trading commodities can be very efficient , particularly if the division into pools matches demand segments . These markets will quickly respond to changes in supply and demand to find an equilibrium price and quantity. In addition, investors can gain passive exposure to the commodity markets through a commodity price index .

In order to diversify their investments and mitigate the risks associated with inflationary debasement of currencies, pension funds and sovereign wealth funds allocate capital to non-listed assets such as a commodities and commodity-related infrastructure.

[ 13 ] Inventory data [ edit ] The inventory of commodities, with low inventories typically leading to more volatile future prices and increasing the risk of a " stockout " (inventory exhaustion). According to economist theorists, companies receive a convenience yield by holding inventories of certain commodities.

Data on inventories of commodities are not available from one common source, although data is available from various sources. Inventory data on 31 commodities was used in a 2006 study on the relationship between inventories and commodity futures risk premiums.

[ 14 ] Commodification of labour [ edit ] See also: Labour is not a commodity In classical political economy and especially in Karl Marx 's critique of political economy , a commodity is an object or a good or service ("product" or "activity" [ 15 ] ) produced by human labour .

[ 16 ] Objects are external to man.

[ 17 ] However, some objects attain " use value " to persons in this world, when they are found to be "necessary, useful or pleasant in life".

[ 18 ] "Use value" makes an object "an object of human wants", [ 19 ] or "a means of subsistence in the widest sense".

[ 20 ] As society developed, people found that they could trade goods and services for other goods and services. At this stage, these goods and services became "commodities". According to Marx, commodities are defined as objects which are offered for sale or are "exchanged in a market".

[ 21 ] In the marketplace, where commodities are sold, "use value" is not helpful in facilitating the sale of commodities. Accordingly, in addition to having use value, commodities must have an "exchange value"—a value that could be expressed in the market.

[ 22 ] Prior to Marx, many economists debated as to what elements made up exchange value.

Adam Smith maintained that exchange value was made up of rent , profit , labour and the costs of wear and tear on the instruments of husbandry.

[ 23 ] David Ricardo , a follower of Adam Smith, modified Smith's approach on this point by alleging that labour alone is the content of the exchange value of any good or service.

[ 24 ] While maintaining that all exchange value in commodities was derived directly from the hands of the people that made the commodity, Ricardo noted that only part of the exchange value of the commodity was paid to the worker who made the commodity. The other part of the value of this particular commodity was labour that was not paid to the worker—unpaid labour. This unpaid labour was retained by the owner of the means of production. In capitalist society, the capitalist owns the means of production and therefore the unpaid labour is retained by the capitalist as rent or as profit. The means of production means the site where the commodity is made, the raw products that are used in the production and the instruments or machines that are used for the production of the commodity.

However, not all commodities are reproducible nor were all commodities originally intended to be sold in the market. These priced goods are also treated as commodities, e.g. human labour-power, works of art and natural resources ("earth itself is an instrument of labour"), [ 25 ] even though they may not be produced specifically for the market, or be non-reproducible goods.

Marx's analysis of the commodity is intended to help solve the problem of what establishes the economic value of goods, using the labour theory of value . This problem was extensively debated by Adam Smith , David Ricardo [ 26 ] and Karl Rodbertus-Jagetzow among others.

All three of the above-mentioned economists rejected the theory that labour composed 100% of the exchange value of any commodity. In varying degrees, these economists turned to supply and demand to establish the price of commodities. Marx held that the "price" and the "value" of a commodity were not synonymous. Price of any commodity would vary according to the imbalance of supply to demand at any one period of time. The "value" of the same commodity would be consistent and would reflect the amount of labour value used to produce that commodity.

Prior to Marx, economists noted that the problem with using the "quantity of labour" to establish the value of commodities was that the time spent by an unskilled worker would be longer than the time spent on the same commodity by a skilled worker. Thus, under this analysis, the commodity produced by an unskilled worker would be more valuable than the same commodity produced by the skilled worker. Marx pointed out, however, that in society at large, an average amount of time that was necessary to produce the commodity would arise. This average time necessary to produce the commodity Marx called the "socially necessary labour time".

[ 27 ] Socially necessary labour time was the proper basis on which to base the "exchange value" of a given commodity.

Commodity super cycle [ edit ] Commodity super cycles are periods of time, around a decade, where commodities as a whole trade at a price that is greater than their long term moving average .

[ 28 ] A super cycle will usually occur when there is large industrial and commercial change in a country or world that requires more resources to support the change. As prices rise, goods and services that rely on commodities rise with them.

History of super cycles [ edit ] There have been four super cycles over the last 120 years worldwide.

[ 29 ] The first commodity super cycle started in late 1890 and was accelerated on the back of widespread U.S. industrialization and World War 1. In 1917 commodity prices peaked and then entered a downtrend to the 1930s. As war erupted in Europe in the late 1930s and eventually including the U.S., the world saw a new cycle begin. Countries were not just preparing for war but also for the aftermath of World War II as large parts of Europe and Asia faced heavy rebuilding. This cycle eventually peaked in 1951 and faded away in the early 70s.

[ 30 ] In the 1970s as world economies grew, they needed more materials and energy to support expansion leading to increases in prices across the board. This boom came to an end as foreign investments fled as extractive industries became nationalized.

[ 30 ] The most recent of commodity super cycles began in 2000 as China joined the World Trade Organization .

[ 30 ] China was also in the beginning of their boom as industry and expansion took off. Workers moved into cities as emerging industries took off and offered a lot of new jobs and opportunities. In 2008 when the Great Recession hit, it put a halt onto the supercycle as GDP's across the world tanked leaving many economies in recessions.

The next or the fifth super cycle could arrive as the world enters the final phases of the COVID-19 pandemic and starts to build massive clean energy infrastructure in view of the commodity price increase.

[ 31 ] See also [ edit ] 2000s commodities boom Commercial off-the-shelf or "commercially available off-the-shelf" (COTS) Commodification Commodity (Marxism) Commodity currency Commodity fetishism Commodity market risk and values Commodity money Commodity price shocks Commodity price index Heterogeneity in economics List of traded commodities Sample grade Standardization Trade Notes [ edit ] ^ a b "Learn What Commodities Are in These Examples!" . Archived from the original on September 8, 2004.

^ "Commodity definition" .

Merriam-Webster Dictionary . Retrieved 30 July 2018 .

^ T., H. (3 January 2017).

"What makes something a commodity?" .

The Economist . Retrieved 22 January 2020 .

^ Merriam-Webster Dictionary , commodity, def. 2a.

Archived 2022-04-20 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved  January 2022.

^ Mas-Colell, Andreu, Michael D. Whinston, and Jeffery  R. Green (1995).

Microeconomic Theory , Oxford, p. 17.

^ Alfred Marshall (1920).

Principles of Economics Press cntrl-f to search for commodity vis- à-vis goods and services.

Archived 2022-01-14 at the Wayback Machine ^ Léon Walras ([1926] 1954).

Elements of Pure Economics Press cntrl-f to search for commodity vis- à-vis goods and services.

Archived 2022-01-15 at the Wayback Machine ^ Karl Marx , " A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy " contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 29 , p. 270.

^ O'Sullivan, Arthur ; Steven M. Sheffrin (2004).

Economics: Principles in action . Pearson / Prentice Hall.

ISBN 0-13-063085-3 .

^ Natasha Singer; Peter Lattman (15 March 2013).

"Workout Supplement Challenged" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 17 March 2013 .

^ C. McGovern, "Commoditization of nanomaterials".

Nanotechnology Perceptions 6 (2010) 155–178.

^ "Corrected: Commodity Traders: The trillion dollar club" .

Reuters . Oct 28, 2011 . Retrieved 2008-06-12 .

^ M. Nicolas Firzli & Vincent Bazi (2011).

"Infrastructure Investments in an Age of Austerity : The Pension and Sovereign Funds Perspective" .

Revue Analyse Financière, volume 41 . . Archived from the original on 17 September 2011 . Retrieved 30 July 2011 .

^ Gorton, GB; et al. (2007). "The Fundamentals of Commodity Futures Returns".

SSRN 996930 .

^ Karl Marx, "Outlines of the Critique of Political Economy" contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 28 , 80.

^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume I (International Publishers: New York, 1967) p. 38 and "Capital" as contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 35 (International Publishers: New York, 1996) p. 48.

^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume I , p. 87 and "Capital" as contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 35 , p. 97.

^ Aristotle, Politica (Oxford, 1966) p. 1257.

^ Karl Marx, "Capital in General: The Commodity" contained in the Collected works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 29 (International Publishers: New York, 1987) p. 269.

^ Karl Marx, "Capital in General: The Commodity" contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 29 , p. 269.

^ Karl Marx, Capital: Volume I p. 36 and "Capital" as contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 35 , p. 46.

^ Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations (Pelican Books: London, 1970) p. 131 and David Ricardo, Principles of Political Economy and Taxation (Pelican Books: 1971, London) p. 55.

^ Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations (Pelican Books: London, 1970) p. 153.

^ David Ricardo, Principles of Political Economy and Taxation (Pelican Books: London, 1971) pp. 56–58.

^ Karl Marx, Capital: Volume I , p. 179 and "Capital" as contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 35 , p. 189.

^ David Ricardo, Principles of Political Economy and Taxation (Pelican Books, London, 1971) pp. 56–58.

^ Karl Marx, Capital: Volume I , p. 39 and "Capital" as contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 35 , p. 49.

^ Spilker, Gregor (March 22, 202).

"Are We Witnessing the Start of A New Commodities Super Cycle?" .

institutional investor .

^ Büyükşahin,Mo, Zmitrowicz, Bahattin,Kun, Konrad (January 2016).

"Commodity Price Supercycles: What are they and What lies ahead?" (PDF) .

Bank Of Canada .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-05-01 . Retrieved May 2, 2021 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c Brown, Randy (April 13, 2021).

"Are We About To Enter A Commodity Supercycle?" .

Forbes . Retrieved April 28, 2021 .

^ Levick, Ewen (2021-03-09).

"New commodity supercycle may benefit Mongolia" .

Mongolia Weekly . Retrieved 2021-05-09 .

External links [ edit ] Look up commodity in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Commodities .

Pricing in Electricity Markets: A Mean Reverting Jump Diffusion Model with Seasonality Collection of current and historical commodities data from Quandl United Nations Human Rights Council Conceptual problems in commodity regulation v t e Commodities and commoditization Soft commodities General Barley Cocoa Coffee Cotton Cottonseed oil Flaxseed Maize Millet Frozen orange juice Oat Olive oil Palm oil Peanut oil Potatoes Rapeseed Rice Rye Rubber Soybean Soybean oil Sugar Tea Wheat Animals & animal products Ambergris Bristle Butter Cashmere Civet Feathers Feeder cattle Lean Hog Live cattle Goats Hide (skin) Horses Ivory Lard Milk Musk Pet industry Pork bellies Pork belly futures Sheep Silk Sponges Tallow Whalebone Wool Wool tops Hard commodities Energy Coal Compressed hydrogen Crude oil Ethanol Heating oil Natural gas Propane Thorium Uranium Industrial metals Aluminium Aluminium alloy Cobalt Copper Lead Molybdenum Nickel Steel Tin Zinc Precious metals Gold Palladium Platinum Silver Organizations Commodity market Futures contract Futures exchange List of commodities exchanges List of futures exchanges Laws Commodity Exchange Act Miscellaneous Commodification Commoditization Commodification of nature Commodification of water Commodity status of animals Fictitious commodities Heritage commodification Economic value Exchange value Price Use value / utility List of traded commodities v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country v t e Population Major topics Demographics of the world Demographic transition Estimates of historical world population Population growth Population momentum Human population projections World population Population biology Population decline Population density Physiological density Population dynamics Population model Population pyramid Population ecology Biocapacity Carrying capacity I = P × A  × T Kaya identity Malthusian growth model Overshoot (population) World3 model Society and population Eugenics Dys genics Human overpopulation Malthusian catastrophe Human population planning Compulsory sterilization Dependency ratio Family planning One-child policy Two-child policy Overconsumption Political demography Population ethics Antinatalism Intergenerational equity Mere addition paradox Natalism Non-identity problem Reproductive rights Sustainable population Zero population growth Publications Population and Environment Population and Development Review Lists Population and housing censuses by country Dependency ratio Largest cities Number of births World population milestones 6 billion 7 8 Population concern organizations Events and organizations 7 Billion Actions Church of Euthanasia International Conference on Population and Development Population Action International Population Connection Population Matters United Nations Population Fund United Nations world population conferences Voluntary Human Extinction Movement World Population Conference World Population Day World Population Foundation Related topics Bennett's law Green Revolution Human impact on the environment Migration Net migration rate Sustainability Commons Category Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐5cf8f5fb49‐v67mv
Cached time: 20250811235805
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.567 seconds
Real time usage: 0.713 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2210/1000000
Revision size: 24396/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 119960/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1805/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 98767/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.320/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6980020/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  545.913      1 -total
 30.25%  165.131      1 Template:Reflist
 17.16%   93.688      5 Template:Cite_web
 16.84%   91.932      1 Template:Business_administration
 16.50%   90.076      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.35%   67.410      1 Template:Short_description
 10.33%   56.396      5 Template:Navbox
  9.78%   53.372      2 Template:Sister_project
  9.48%   51.764      2 Template:Side_box
  7.22%   39.439      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:48218:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235805 and revision id 1302822396. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Commodity&oldid=1302822396 " Categories : Commodities Commodities used as an investment Business intelligence terms Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 16:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Commodity 46 languages Add topic

