Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Meno 2 Phaedo 3 Neoplatonism 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Anamnesis (philosophy) 21 languages Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara Français Hrvatski Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in Plato's epistemological and psychological theory This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Anamnesis" philosophy – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is missing information about the contribution of Phaedrus to Plato's development of the theory.

Please expand the article to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page .

( January 2025 ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Platonism Life Works Theory of forms Intelligible form Hyperuranion Theory of soul Nous Thumos Phren Epistemology Anamnesis Peritrope Dianoia Cardinal virtues Moral rationalism Political philosophy Mimesis Orthotes onomaton Euthyphro dilemma The Republic Allegory of the cave Analogy of the Sun Analogy of the divided line Form of the Good Noble lie Philosopher king Plato's number Ship of State Ring of Gyges Myth of Er Timaeus Atlantis Demiurge World soul Organicism Classical element Platonic solid Tertium quid Khôra Related articles Commentaries The Academy in Athens Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Neoplatonism and Christianity Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Pseudo-Platonica Related categories Plato Philosophy portal v t e In Plato's theory of epistemology , anamnesis ( / ˌ æ n æ m ˈ n iː s ɪ s / ; Ancient Greek : ἀνάμνησις ) refers to the recollection of innate knowledge acquired before birth. The concept posits the claim that learning involves the act of rediscovering knowledge from within oneself. This stands in contrast to the opposing doctrine known as empiricism , which posits that all knowledge is derived from experience and sensory perception .

Plato develops the theory of anamnesis in his Socratic dialogues : Meno , Phaedo , and Phaedrus .

Meno [ edit ] Further information: Meno In Meno , Plato's character (and old teacher) Socrates is challenged by Meno to explain how someone could find out what the nature of virtue is if they did not already know anything about it.

[ 1 ] In other words, one who knows none of the attributes, properties, and/or other descriptive markers of any kind that help signify what something is (physical or otherwise) will not recognize it even after coming across it. Therefore, if the converse is true, and one knows the attributes, properties and/or other descriptive markers of this thing, one should not need to seek it out at all. The conclusion is that in either instance, there is no point trying to gain that "something"; in the case of Plato's aforementioned work, there is no point in seeking knowledge.

Socrates' response is to develop his theory of anamnesis and to suggest that the soul is immortal , and repeatedly incarnated ; knowledge is in the soul from eternity (86b), but each time the soul is incarnated its knowledge is forgotten in the trauma of birth. What one perceives to be learning, then, is the recovery of what one has forgotten. (Once it has been brought back it is true belief, to be turned into genuine knowledge by understanding.) Socrates (and Plato) thus sees himself not as a teacher but as a midwife , aiding with the birth of knowledge that was already there in the student.

The theory is illustrated by Socrates asking a slave boy questions about geometry. At first, the boy gives the wrong answer; when that is pointed out to him, he is puzzled, but by asking questions, Socrates helps him to reach the correct answer. That is intended to show that since the boy was not told the answer, he reached the truth by only recollecting what he had once known but later forgotten.

Phaedo [ edit ] Further information: Phaedo In Phaedo , Plato develops his theory of anamnesis , in part by combining it with his theory of forms . Firstly, he elaborates how anamnesis can be achieved: whereas in Meno , nothing more than Socrates' method of questioning is offered, in Phaedo , Plato presents a way of living that would enable one to overcome the misleading nature of the body through katharsis (Ancient Greek: κάθαρσις , lit.

' cleansing ' or ' purification ' , i.e., from guilt or defilement). The body and its senses are the source of error; knowledge cannot be regained except through the use of reason, and contemplating things with the soul ( noesis ).

[ 2 ] While the body's perceptual faculties are deceptive, Plato also argues that the falsehoods that they communicate to the soul can be used to trigger or prompt recollection.

[ 3 ] Secondly, Plato clarifies that genuine knowledge, as opposed to mere true belief ( doxa ), is distinguished by its content.  One can know only eternal truths since they are the only truths that possibly were in the soul from eternity. It may be very useful to have a true belief about, say, the best way to get from London to Oxford, but such a belief does not qualify as knowledge; it is not possible for the soul to possess such factually contingent propositions for all eternity.

Neoplatonism [ edit ] For later interpreters of Plato, the concept of anamnesis became less epistemic and more ontological .

Plotinus himself did not posit recollection in the strict sense of the term because all knowledge of universally important ideas ( logos ) came from a source outside of time (Dyad or the divine nous ) and was accessible, using contemplation, to the soul as part of noesis . They were more objects of experience, of inner knowledge or insight , than of recollection. However, in Neoplatonism , the theory of anamnesis became part of the mythology of the descent of the soul.

Porphyry 's short work On the Cave of the Nymphs in the Odyssey (ostensibly a commentary on the brief passage in Odyssey XIII) elucidated that notion, as did Macrobius 's much longer Commentary on the Dream of Scipio . The idea of psychic memory was used by Neoplatonists to demonstrate the celestial and immaterial origins of the soul and to explain how memories of the world-soul could be recalled by everyday human beings. As such, psychic recollection was intrinsically connected to the Platonic conception of the soul. Since the contents of individual "material" or physical memories were trivial, only the universal recollection of Forms, or divine objects, drew one closer to the immortal source of being.

Anamnesis is the closest that human minds can come to experiencing the freedom of the soul before it is encumbered by matter. The incarnation process is described in Neoplatonism as a trauma that causes the soul to forget its experiences (and often its divine origins). The storyteller's voice is concealed by John and Plato in order to pursue their anamnetic efforts and to encourage the following generations to be not only readers but also partakers in their original discussions on the soul.

[ 4 ] Gratitude, as an example of divine salvation , was expressed by offering to God the first fruits of the harvest which maintains an identity with those who performed these actions in the past and therefore actualising them in the present.

[ 5 ] References [ edit ] ^ Meno 80d ^ Phaedo 66b-d.

^ See Douglas R. Campbell, "The Soul's Tool: Plato on the Usefulness of the Body," Elenchos 43 (1): 7–27. 2022.

^ Parsenios, George L. (March 2017).

"Anamnesis and the Silent Narrator in Plato and John" .

Religions .

8 (4): 47.

doi : 10.3390/rel8040047 .

^ Cody, Alfred (January 2006). "Little Historical Creed or little Historical Anamnesis".

The Catholic Biblical Quarterly . Jan 2006: 9.

Bibliography [ edit ] Plato Phaedo , 1911: edited with introduction and notes by John Burnet (Oxford: Clarendon Press) Jane M. Day 1994 Plato's Meno in Focus (London: Routledge) – contains an introduction and full translation by Day, together with papers on Meno by various philosophers Don S. Armentrout and Robert Boak Slocum [edd], An Episcopal Dictionary of the Church, A User Friendly Reference for Episcopalians (New York, Church Publishing Incorporated) Jacob Klein, A Commentary on Plato's Meno (Chicago, 1989), pp. 103–173.

Norman Gulley, Plato's Theory of Knowledge (London, 1962), pp. 1–47.

Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐554b8dbc64‐cg2pw
Cached time: 20250818125040
Cache expiry: 21600
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.462 seconds
Real time usage: 0.599 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1122/1000000
Revision size: 7878/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 54932/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11815/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 32455/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.340/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20988229/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  551.340      1 -total
 19.97%  110.081      2 Template:Langx
 16.22%   89.448      1 Template:Reflist
 15.88%   87.570      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 15.84%   87.319      1 Template:Platonism
 14.11%   77.770      2 Template:Cite_journal
 12.48%   68.828      1 Template:Short_description
 10.32%   56.901      3 Template:Ambox
  9.44%   52.048      1 Template:Authority_control
  9.14%   50.381      1 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:30556559:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818125040 and revision id 1288955901. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anamnesis_(philosophy)&oldid=1288955901 " Categories : Concepts in ancient Greek epistemology Plato's theory of soul Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles to be expanded from January 2025 Articles lacking in-text citations from August 2022 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 5 May 2025, at 16:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anamnesis (philosophy) 21 languages Add topic

