Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Non-verbal Communication 2 People With Disabilities 3 Sports 4 Professional Settings 5 Disadvantages Toggle Disadvantages subsection 5.1 NLD (Nonverbal Learning Disorder) 6 Culture 7 References Toggle the table of contents Body-to-body communication 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Way of communicating with others Body-to-body communication is a way of communicating with others through the use of nonverbal communication , without using speech or verbalization. It can include body language , facial expressions, and other bodily gestures in order to communicate with others without the need of verbal communication .

[ 1 ] Body-to-body communication accounts for postures , body language , physical touch, nonverbal language, and other bodily gestures .

This form of communication accounts for roughly up to sixty percent of human conversation [ 2 ] and can be expressed in many different forms. Body-to-body communication is used in collaboration with, as well as in replacement of verbal communication to emphasize the point being made.

[ 3 ] Body-to-body communication is also used by people subconsciously more than consciously at times.

Human communication consists of both verbal and nonverbal interaction between two or more individuals. Nonverbal communication enhances human communication as a whole in a variety of ways and is an important aspect of social interactions between humans. Nonverbal responses are known to be immediate and honest. Based on studies, body movement and bodily gestures are considered the exact dominant behavior that defines nonverbal communication.

[ 4 ] Non-verbal Communication [ edit ] Non-verbal cues are just as important as the verbal cues. Even though one is not talking, one can still continue to communicate through bodily expressions. From the tone of voice, to the way people cross arms these all convey a message. Verbal communication expresses thoughts but, nonverbal communication expresses inner feelings and thoughts more realistically. Body Language gives very important hints of people's feelings and thoughts at a moment of making a decision.

[ 5 ] Gesture is not only communicative but it is an integral part of humans beings. This is endorsed by observations of those blind from birth, who gesture in a similar manner as people with sight, even if the other person is also blind.

[ citation needed ] Clues of nonverbal language are controlled and activated by the limbic system in the brain. This is the part of the brain that reacts instantaneously, automatically and in real time. Because this is the part of the brain in charge of survival, it never rests and always remains on. This is the control center of emotions in which signals are shot to other parts of the brain, which assembles groups of behaviors that can be observed and decoded as they manifest into nonverbal language. These reactions occur without thinking and due to this, it is believed that these reactions are truly genuine. Because limbic responses of survival are intertwined in the autonomous nervous system, it is very difficult to hide them.

[ 6 ] People With Disabilities [ edit ] Nonverbal communication gives people who lack the ability to communicate verbally the ability to express things that otherwise could not be expressed verbally, which makes it easier to identify and understand their disorder. People with autism often have difficulty with both verbal and nonverbal communication. Autistic people have trouble reading social cues and are often unresponsive to bodily messages and to their environment .

[ 7 ] Major depression give messages of distress such as loss of energy , sleep disturbances , difficulty concentrating, and lack of motivation to signify their mental situation.

[ 7 ] Sports [ edit ] Body-to-body communication is utilized in sports to convey different types of messages from one player to another or from a coach to a player. These messages can be emotional and or informational. In sports a lot of emotion is expressed during a game whether they are good or bad. When players are upset with another they may use physical aggression to express their anger or issue with the other player. For instance, committing an intentional hard foul on someone in order to send that message nonverbally. In addition when good emotion is expressed from player top player or from player to they will give them a smack or tap on the butt which is a substitute for saying "good job." Also, in sports body-to-body communication is used to send informational messages. When coaches are trying to coach their players, they may perform the action or skill on someone to get a coaching point across. Body-to-body communication is used throughout sports more than most people know.

Professional Settings [ edit ] Most work places have either written or understood rules about what body-to-body communication is appropriate and what is not. Nonverbal communication is utilized in a professional setting by adding assertion what is said verbally or by replacing verbal communication when it is not possible to verbalize something.

[ 8 ] Visual communication in the workplace, such as bodily cues and facial expressions, paired with verbal communication and knowledge vocalization can create an attitude of assertion and improve professional behavior.

[ 2 ] Humans have many ways to express non-verbally. For example, with posture, clothes, make-up, and colors. Image Counsellors take this into account when  transforming a client's appearance, with the purpose of transmitting a message. For this reason, in a professional setting, one is advised to dress a certain way. Dressing properly can communicate: professionalism, and experience.

[ 9 ] Sometimes humans will give off signs that will highlight confirmatory facts that otherwise can remain unapparent through the use of body communication. If an individual wishes for his message to be conveyed, he must mobilize his activity so that his message can be expressed during the interaction. For example, if an individual wishes to give the impression of being sure of their judgement, they will forgo the moment of thought. Instead, this individual will give an immediate decision which will demonstrate the audience that he is sure of his judgement.  This is a practice that is used by many professionals such as lawyers, policemen, and doctors use in their work settings.

[ 10 ] Disadvantages [ edit ] Nonverbal communication is not as precise and explanatory as verbal communication and thus can be vague or misleading to those who are receiving the communication. Because this way of communicating is so varied and has so many ways of being expressed, some meanings can become lost or misunderstood.

[ 2 ] It can become difficult to focus on the message being conveyed if more than one gesture is being expressed at the same time and some signals can be missed if one is focusing on another at the same time, causing confusion in the message. This type of communication also makes it difficult to change subjects or to go into detail about a subject without the use of verbal indication .

[ 11 ] NLD (Nonverbal Learning Disorder) [ edit ] Body-to-body communication is only helpful to those with the ability to read and understand another person's body language and communication. Nonverbal communication is not possible to use for those who lack the ability understand bodily communication, specifically people with a nonverbal learning disorder .

[ 12 ] Culture [ edit ] Culture has a very significant impact on how people communicate, and this influences both verbal and nonverbal communication across cultures. The same way that people of different cultures speak in different languages, the use body language and nonverbal communication is very different across cultures and ethnic groups and only few nonverbal gestures have the same or a similar meaning universally. For example, bowing to a person indicates rank and status in Japan, but has little to no meaning in the United States. As for facial expressions, Asian cultures tend to suppress any facial expression whereas Mediterranean cultures exaggerate facial expressions when expressing sadness or anger.

[ 13 ] Although nonverbal communication is expressed differently across cultures, some is thought to be universal across cultures. This universal nonverbal language is thought to encompass human emotions, such as sadness, grief, anger, happiness, etc.

[ 8 ] A culture is a shared system of socially transmitted behavior passed on from previous generations that describes, defines, and guides people's ways of life. Culture can influence nonverbal communication in many ways. The same gestures in different countries can have distinct meaning. For example, the American A-OK sign can have an obscene meaning in many nations in Europe, having sexual implications.  Facial expression is another mean of nonverbal communication that culture affects. Humans have the ability to express emotions through facial expressions.

Cultural display rules are learned during childhood and plays a big part on how people from different cultures manage and modify their emotional expressions depending on the social situation that they are in. In an experiment done by Ekman and Friesen; results showed that Japanese people are more likely to disguise their negative emotions in the presence of other people, where Americans will not.

[ 14 ] References [ edit ] ^ Poyatos, Fernando (2002).

Nonverbal Communication across Disciplines. Volume 1: Culture, sensory interaction, speech, conversation . John Benjamins Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-90-272-9712-9 .

^ a b c Zimmerman, Constance, and Luecke, Richard A.. Asserting Yourself At Work. Saranac Lake, NY, USA: Amacom, 2010. ProQuest ebrary. Web. 30 November 2015.

^ Guye-Vuilleme, A., T. K. Capin, S. Pandzic, N. Magnenat Thalmann, and D. Thalmann. "Nonverbal Communication Interface For Collaborative Virtual Environments." Virtual Reality: Print.

^ Kamisnki, Juliane.

"Detection of Nonverbal Synchronization through Phase Difference in Human Communication" .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Benzer, Ahmet.

"Teacher's Opinion About the Use of Body Language" .

March 8, 2016 . Marmara Universitesi.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ C. Angel, Alfredo.

"Comprender el Lenguaje de Cuerpo" .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b Coats, Erik J., Feldman, Robert S., and Philoppot, Pierre, eds. Nonverbal Behavior in Clinical Settings. Cary, NC, USA: Oxford University Press, 2003. ProQuest ebrary. Web. 30 November 2015.

^ a b Mcintosh, Perry, and Luecke, Richard A.. Interpersonal Communication Skills in the Workplace (2nd Edition). Saranac Lake, NY, USA: Amacom, 2008. ProQuest ebrary. Web. 30 November 2015.

^ Simona, Elena.

"ARTISTIC LANGUAGE IN NON-VERBAL COMMUNICATION" . Transilvania University of Braşov.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Goffman, Erving (1959).

The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life (PDF) . Penguin Books. p. 40 . Retrieved April 4, 2016 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Advantages and disadvantages of non-verbal communication" .

The Business Communication . Retrieved 2015-11-30 .

^ Mamen, Maggie. Understanding Nonverbal Learning Disabilities : A Common-Sense Guide for Parents and Professionals. London, GBR: Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 2007. ProQuest ebrary. Web. 1 December 2015.

^ "Non Verbal Communication" .

www.andrews.edu . Retrieved 2015-11-30 .

^ Matsumoto, David.

"Culture and Nonverbal Behavior" (PDF) . Retrieved April 5, 2016 .

v t e Nonverbal communication Modalities Physical Blushing Body language / Kinesics Body-to-body communication Facial expression Facial Action Coding System Microexpression Subtle expression Gesture List Speech-independent gestures Haptic communication Imitation Interpersonal synchrony Laughter Oculesics Eye contact Pupil dilation Olfaction Posture Proxemics Speech Affect Emotional prosody Paralanguage Intonation Loudness Prosody Rhythm Stress Tone Voice quality Social context Chronemics Conventions Display rules Habitus High-context and low-context cultures Interpersonal relationship Social norm Other Emoticon / Smiley One-bit message Missed call Silent service code Unconscious Microexpression Non-verbal leakage Multi-faceted Affect display Deception Emotion recognition First impression Intimacy Broader concepts Cognitive academic language proficiency Communication Emotional intelligence Nunchi People skills Semiotics Social behavior Social competence Social cue Social skills Unsaid Further information Disorders Aprosodia Asperger syndrome Autism Fragile X Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified Childhood disintegrative disorder Rett syndrome Dyssemia Nonverbal learning disorder Social (pragmatic) communication disorder Neuroanatomy Limbic system / Limbic lobe Mirror neuron Applications Cold reading Lie detection Freudian slip Poker tell Targeted advertising Technology Computer processing of body language Emotion recognition in conversation Gesture recognition List of facial expression databases Sentiment analysis Key people Ray Birdwhistell Charles Darwin Paul Ekman Related Animal communication Behavioral communication Aggressive Assertive Passive Passive-aggressive Impression management Meta-communication Monastic sign lexicons Verbal communication Manual-tactile verbal Sign language Tactile signing Tadoma Art and literature Mime Mimoplastic art Subtext Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Body-to-body_communication&oldid=1279986541 " Categories : Human communication Human positions Nonverbal communication Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2020 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2019 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 This page was last edited on 11 March 2025, at 19:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Body-to-body communication 1 language Add topic

