Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Pleistocene 2 Specific interglacials 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Interglacial 36 languages Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ქართული Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Interglacial period ) Geological interval of warmer temperature that separates glacial periods within an ice age This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Interglacial" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2010 ) Shows the pattern of temperature and ice volume changes associated with recent glacials and interglacials An interglacial period (or alternatively interglacial , interglaciation ) is a geological interval of warmer global average temperature lasting thousands of years that separates consecutive glacial periods within an ice age . The current Holocene interglacial began at the end of the Pleistocene , about 11,700 years ago.

Pleistocene [ edit ] During the 2.5 million years of the Pleistocene , numerous glacials, or significant advances of continental ice sheets, in North America and Europe , occurred at intervals of approximately 40,000 to 100,000 years. The long glacial periods were separated by more temperate and shorter interglacials.

During interglacials, such as the present one, the climate warms and the tundra recedes polewards following the ice sheets. Forests return to areas that once supported tundra vegetation. Interglacials are identified on land or in shallow epicontinental seas by their paleontology. Floral and faunal remains of species pointing to temperate climate and indicating a specific age are used to identify particular interglacials. Commonly used are mammalian and molluscan species, pollen and plant macro-remains (seeds and fruits). However, many other fossil remains may be helpful: insects, ostracods, foraminifera, diatoms, etc. Recently, ice cores and ocean sediment cores provide more quantitative and accurately-dated evidence for temperatures and total ice volumes.

Interglacials and glacials coincide with cyclic changes in Earth's orbit . Three orbital variations contribute to interglacials. The first is a change in Earth's orbit around the Sun, or eccentricity . The second is a shift in the tilt of Earth's axis, or obliquity . The third is the wobbling motion of Earth's axis, or precession .

[ 1 ] In the Southern Hemisphere , warmer summers occur when the lower-half of Earth is tilted toward the Sun and the planet is nearest the Sun in its elliptical orbit. Cooler summers occur when Earth is farthest from the Sun during the Southern Hemisphere summer. Such effects are more pronounced when the eccentricity of the orbit is large. When the obliquity is large, seasonal changes are more extreme.

[ 2 ] Interglacials are a useful tool for geological mapping and for anthropologists, as they can be used as a dating method for hominid fossils.

[ 3 ] Brief periods of milder climate that occurred during the last glacial are called interstadials . Most, but not all, interstadials are shorter than interglacials. Interstadial climates may have been relatively warm, but not necessarily. Because the colder periods (stadials) have often been very dry, wetter (not necessarily warmer) periods have been registered in the sedimentary record as interstadials as well.

The oxygen isotope ratio obtained from seabed sediment core samples , a proxy for the average global temperature, is an important source of information for changes in Earth's climate.

An interglacial optimum, or climatic optimum of an interglacial, is the period within an interglacial that experienced the most 'favourable' climate and often occurs during the middle of that interglacial. The climatic optimum of an interglacial both follows and is followed by phases within the same interglacial that experienced a less favourable climate (but still a 'better' climate than the one during the preceding or succeeding glacials ). During an interglacial optimum, sea levels rise to their highest values, but not necessarily exactly at the same time as the climatic optimum.

Specific interglacials [ edit ] The last six interglacials are: Marine Isotope Stage 13 (524–474 thousand years ago).

Hoxnian / Holstein / Mindel-Riss / Marine Isotope Stage 11 (424–374 thousand years ago).

Purfleet Interglacial / Marine Isotope Stage 9 (337–300 thousand years ago).

La Bouchet Interglacial / Arousa Interglacial / Aveley Interglacial / Marine Isotope Stage 7e (242–230 thousand years ago). MIS 7a, MIS 7b and MIS 7c may or may not be included. MIS 7d was a cold period dividing the MIS 7 interglacial into two distinct periods. MIS 7e contained the climatic optimum.

Last Interglacial / Eemian / Marine Isotope Stage 5e (130–115 thousand years ago). The preceding interglacial optimum occurred during the Late Pleistocene Eemian Stage , 131–114 ka. During the Eemian the climatic optimum took place during pollen zone E4 in the type area (city of Amersfoort , Netherlands ). Here this zone is characterized by the expansion of Quercus (oak), Corylus (hazel), Taxus (yew), Ulmus (elm), Fraxinus (ash), Carpinus (hornbeam), and Picea (spruce). During the Eemian Stage (from about 128,000 BCE until 113,000 BCE), sea level was between 5 and 9.4 meters higher than today [ 4 ] and the water temperature of the North Sea was about 2 °C higher than at present.

Holocene (12,000 years ago to the present). During the present interglacial, the Holocene, the climatic optimum occurred during the Subboreal (5 to 2.5 ka BP , which corresponds to 3000 BC–500 BC) and Atlanticum (9 to 5 ka, which corresponds to roughly 7000 BC–3000 BC). The current climatic phase following this climatic optimum is still within the same interglacial (the Holocene). That warm period was followed by a gradual decline until about 2000 years ago, with another warm period until the Little Ice Age (1250–1850).

See also [ edit ] Greenhouse and icehouse Earth Milankovitch cycles Snowball Earth Interstadial periods Last glacial maximum Timeline of glaciation References [ edit ] ^ Eldredge, S.

"Ice Ages – What are they and what causes them?" .

Utah Geological Survey . Retrieved 2 March 2013 .

^ Rieke, G.

"Long Term Climate" . Archived from the original on 2017-08-19 . Retrieved 2013-03-14 .

^ Kottak, Conard Phillip (2005).

Window on Humanity . New York: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 978-0-07-289028-0 .

^ Kopp, R.; et al. (2009).

"Probabilistic assessment of sea level during the last interglacial stage" .

Nature .

462 (7275): 863– 867.

arXiv : 0903.0752 .

doi : 10.1038/nature08686 .

PMID 20016591 .

S2CID 10676558 . Retrieved 20 Dec 2018 .

v t e Greenhouse and Icehouse Earth Hothouse Earth Hypothetical runaway greenhouse state Greenhouse Earth Tropical temperatures may reach poles Icehouse Earth Global climate during an ice age Snowball Earth Earth's surface entirely or nearly frozen over Uninhabitably hot Warm period Interglacials Interstadials and Stadials Glacials Cold period v t e Continental glaciations General Post-glacial rebound Glacial lake outburst flood Time periods Glacial period Timeline of glaciation Quaternary glaciation Illinoian Stage Interglacial Interstadial Penultimate Glacial Period Last Glacial Period Last Glacial Maximum Mousterian Pluvial Holocene glacial retreat Oldest Dryas Older Dryas Pleistocene Pre-Illinoian Stage Quaternary glaciation Sangamonian Stage Wisconsin glaciation Bølling–Allerød warming Late Glacial Interstadial Huelmo–Mascardi Cold Reversal Younger Dryas 8.2 kiloyear event 4.2 kiloyear event Piora Oscillation Little Ice Age Landforms Erosional Fjord Glacial striae Roche moutonnée Tunnel valley U-shaped valley Glacial lake Proglacial lake Subglacial lake Supraglacial lake Ribbon lake List of prehistoric lakes Depositional Drumlin Erratic block Moraine Pulju moraine Rogen moraine Terminal moraine Till plain Veiki moraine Glacifluvial Diluvium Esker Giant current ripples Kame Kame delta Kettle hole Outwash fan Sandur North America Greenland ice sheet Canadian Shield Cordilleran ice sheet Laurentide ice sheet Lake Agassiz Lake Chicago Lake Tight Canada Arrowhead Provincial Park , Ontario Big Rock (glacial erratic) , Alberta Cypress Hills (Canada) , Saskatchewan Eramosa River , Ontario Eskers Provincial Park , British Columbia Foothills Erratics Train , Alberta Lion's Head Provincial Park , Ontario Origin of the Oak Ridges Moraine , Ontario Ovayok Territorial Park , Nunavut United States Lake Bonneville , Utah Lake Lahontan , Nevada Lake Missoula , Montana Glacial Lake Wisconsin , Wisconsin Chippewa Moraine State Recreation Area , Wisconsin Coteau des Prairies , South Dakota Devil's Lake State Park , Wisconsin Glacial Lakes State Park , Minnesota Glacial history of Minnesota Horicon Marsh State Wildlife Area , Wisconsin Ice Age Floods National Geologic Trail , Idaho, Oregon and Washington Ice Age National Scientific Reserve , Wisconsin Ice Age Trail , Wisconsin Interstate State Park , Minnesota and Wisconsin Kelleys Island , Ohio Teays River , Ohio Kettle Moraine State Forest , Wisconsin Mill Bluff State Park , Wisconsin Oneida Lake , New York Two Creeks Buried Forest State Natural Area , Wisconsin Withrow Moraine and Jameson Lake Drumlin Field , Washington Yosemite National Park , California Eurasia Hardangerfjord Killary Harbour Monte Rosa Svalbard Antarctica Antarctic Glaciation Antarctic ice sheet ( East , West ) Lambert Glacier Ross Ice Shelf Category Portals : Earth sciences Evolutionary biology Geology Paleontology Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Interglacial&oldid=1244765589 " Category : Interglacials Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2010 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 9 September 2024, at 01:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Interglacial 36 languages Add topic

