Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Scientific reviews 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Bio-like structure Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bio-like structures were claimed to be a form of synthetic life obtained by the Soviet microbiologist V. O. Kalinenko in distilled water, as well as on an agar gel , under the influence of an electric field .  However, these entities are most likely non-living inorganic structures.

Description [ edit ] The original idea behind the experiments was a consequence of Kalinenko's observations made during an expedition studying microorganisms that live at the bottom of sea and ocean waters. It was assumed that test samples were not contaminated, since the experiments were carried out in sterile laboratory conditions and the formed structures did not resemble microorganisms currently known to science. Kalinenko described the process as the creation of life forms from inanimate matter—water, air, and electricity. The structures were reported to have various amoeba -like shapes, resembling discs, cigars and caudate rockets. They seemingly possessed the basic characteristics of living organisms in that they could move, grow and multiply, and cell " nuclei " were observed, which, similarly to naturally occurring nuclei, contained " chromosomes ". Some "amoebas" turned out to be "predators" that could envelop and then digest their "victims". Moreover, Kalinenko argued the structures exhibited enzymatic activity by dissolving calcite and magnesite crystals; therefore, it might be concluded that they were not minerals themselves. Kalinenko did not give the structures a formal name; instead, he referred to them as "bio-like structures", "biostructures" and "artificial cells". As evidence to support his claims, Kalinenko presented numerous photographs showing the various stages of the formation and development of "biostructures".

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Kalinenko termed the process of the synthesis of these structures as "energobiosis" and claimed that the method he described might also be used to synthesize protein-based cells.

[ 1 ] Scientific reviews [ edit ] The structures have been described by Kalinenko as "living" microorganisms; however, his statements have been called into question. A review study carried out in a laboratory concluded that these structures lack proteins, amino acids, nucleic acids (and their precursors, purine and pyrimidine bases), and adenosine triphosphate; that is, they "contain no important compounds necessary for all known organisms" and therefore "cannot be regarded as living structures".

[ 4 ] Although it has been actually found that some of the structures produced by Kalinenko slightly resembled bacteria or amoebas in their shape and form, the group of workers did not detect any microorganisms in the samples. However, a possibility that the described process may have something to do with the origin of life on Earth has not been completely ruled out.

[ 5 ] Scientists have not explicitly stated what "biostructures" truly are, but it has been suggested that they probably consist of inorganic salts.

[ 3 ] Kalinenko's striking declaration that "biostructures" are living units met with bewilderment and skepticism among biologists of the USSR Academy of Sciences. It has been implied that the conclusions Kalinenko drew resulted from his lack of a critical attitude towards the data, as it seemed impossible to create a cell under the described conditions; there were also those who were more sharply critical of him.

[ 5 ] According to NASA researchers, "presently known scientific principles of biology and biochemistry" cannot allow inorganic entities to be considered alive, and "the postulated existence" of such entities "has not been proved" as no confirmatory reports by other scientists exist.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Jeewanu Protocell References [ edit ] ^ a b Kalinenko VO (1963). "Biopodobnyye struktury" [Bio-Like Structures].

Nauka i Zhizn (in Russian) (8). Moscow: 67– 70.

^ Kalinenko VO (1964).

"Eksperimental'noye formirovaniye biopodobnykh struktur" [Experimental Formation of Bio-Like Structures].

Mikrobiologiia (in Russian).

33 (2): 356– 63.

PMID 14206072 .

^ a b Kosogorov M (1964). "— Mozhno li sdelat' amebu?" [Can you make an amoeba?].

Tekhnika Molodezhi (in Russian) (1): 6– 7.

^ Meisel MN, Remezova TS, Medvedeva GA, Pomoshchnikova NA, Poglazova MN (1964). "The Nature of Structures Obtained by V.O. Kalinenko in Distilled Water Under the Influence of an Electric Current".

Mikrobiologiia (in Russian).

33 (2): 364– 7.

PMID 14206073 .

^ a b "— Net, amebu sdelat' nel'zya!" [No, you can't make an amoeba!].

Tekhnika Molodezhi (in Russian) (1): 7. 1964.

^ Caren LD, Ponnamperuma C (1967).

A review of some experiments on the synthesis of 'Jeewanu' .

NASA Technical Memorandum X-1439.

(Report). Moffett Field, California: Ames Research Center.

v t e Life , non-cellular life , and comparable structures Cellular life " Prokaryota " Archaea Bacteria Mitochondrion Plastid LUCA Eukaryota Animalia Fungi Plantae " Protista " Incertae sedis Parakaryon Microbes with highly unusual DNA (?) Non-cellular life Virus Viroid Satellite Realms Adnaviria Duplodnaviria Monodnaviria Riboviria Ribozyviria Varidnaviria Unassigned Classes Naldaviricetes Families Alphasatellitidae Ampullaviridae Anelloviridae Avsunviroidae Bicaudaviridae Clavaviridae Finnlakeviridae Fuselloviridae Globuloviridae Guttaviridae Halspiviridae Ovaliviridae Plasmaviridae Polydnaviridae Portogloboviridae Pospiviroidae Spiraviridae Thaspiviridae Tolecusatellitidae Genera Dinodnavirus Rhizidiovirus Other Nanobe (?) Obelisk Comparable structures Bio-like structure Cancer cell HeLa Clonally transmissible cancer Cosmid Defective interfering particle Endogenous viral element Fosmid Integrative and conjugative element Jeewanu " Nanobacterium " Phagemid Plasmid Prion Fungal prion Proteinoid microsphere Retroelements not elsewhere classified Retron Diversity-generating retroelement Telomerase reverse transcriptase Reverse transcriptase-related cellular gene Ribozyme Spiegelman's Monster Tandem repeat Transposable element Retroposon Transpoviron Xenobot Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bio-like_structure&oldid=1032707540 " Category : Origin of life Hidden category: CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) This page was last edited on 9 July 2021, at 04:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bio-like structure Add languages Add topic

