Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Torrid Zone 2 Temperate zones 3 Frigid zones 4 History 5 See also 6 References and footnotes Toggle the table of contents Geographical zone 31 languages Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Кыргызча မြန်မာဘာသာ Нохчийн Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русский Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська اردو 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Major regions of Earth's surface demarcated by latitude This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Geographical zone" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Earth's geographical zones Map of annual average temperatures The five main latitude regions of Earth's surface comprise geographical zones , [ 1 ] divided by the major circles of latitude . The differences between them relate to climate . They are as follows: The North Frigid Zone , between the North Pole at 90° N and the Arctic Circle at 66°33′50.5″ N, covers 4.12% of Earth's surface.

The North Temperate Zone , between the Arctic Circle at 66°33′50.5″ N and the Tropic of Cancer at 23°26′09.5″ N, covers 25.99% of Earth's surface.

The Torrid Zone , between the Tropic of Cancer at 23°26′09.5″ N and the Tropic of Capricorn at 23°26′09.5″ S, covers 39.78% of Earth's surface.

The South Temperate Zone , between the Tropic of Capricorn at 23°26′09.5″ S and the Antarctic Circle at 66°33′50.5″ S, covers 25.99% of Earth's surface.

The South Frigid Zone , from the Antarctic Circle at 66°33′50.5″ S and the South Pole at 90° S, covers 4.12% of Earth's surface.

Earth's climatic zones Ice cap Tundra Boreal Warm temperate Subtropical Tropical On the basis of latitudinal extent, the globe is divided into three broad heat zones.

Torrid Zone [ edit ] The Torrid Zone is also known as the tropics . This zone is bounded on the north by the Tropic of Cancer and on the south by the Tropic of Capricorn ; these latitudes mark the northern and southern extremes in which the Sun passes [ a ] directly overhead. This happens once annually on these cusps, but in the tropics proper, the Sun passes overhead twice a year.

Within the northern tropics, the Sun passes overhead its first time for that year before the June solstice , at which time it does so as to the Tropic of Cancer. It passes over these latitudes in turn again, on its apparent southward journey, to and before the September equinox . After then, the center of the Sun at the high point, the zenith , of the sky (which makes for the subsolar point beneath) aligns with successive latitudes in the southern tropics. The Sun passes overhead of these then does so once per year for the Tropic of Capricorn at the December solstice , then passes back again over those latitudes to return to the equator for the March equinox .

The Torrid zone includes southern Mexico , Central America , the Caribbean , northern South America (larger parts of Brazil , the Guyanas , Caribbean South America , Andean states and the northern tip of the Southern Cone ), the Sudan , the southern regions of Western Sahara , Algeria , Libya and Egypt , West Africa , Central Africa , East Africa , larger parts of Southern Africa ( Malawi , Zambia , Zimbabwe , northern Namibia and northern Botswana ), southern Middle East (southern Saudi Arabia , southern United Arab Emirates , Oman and Yemen ), southern Indian subcontinent (south-central and southern India , southern Bangladesh , Sri Lanka and Maldives ), most of Southeast Asia , southern Taiwan , northern Australia (the northern regions of the Australian states of Western Australia and Queensland , the northern regions of the Northern Territory , and the entire territory of the New Guinea island), the northern tip of Zealandia ( New Caledonia ), and a great part of Oceania ( Melanesia , Micronesia , and Polynesia , this later not including New Zealand).

Temperate zones [ edit ] In the two temperate zones, consisting of the tepid latitudes (including subtropical areas), the Sun is never directly overhead, and the climate is mild, generally ranging from warm to cool. The four annual seasons, spring , summer , autumn , and winter , occur in these areas.

The North Temperate Zone includes North America (including northern Mexico and the northern Bahamas ), Europe , North Africa ( Morocco , Tunisia and the northern regions of Western Sahara, Algeria, Libya and Egypt), Northern Asia , East Asia , Northern Vietnam , [ 2 ] Central Asia , northern Indian subcontinent ( Pakistan , northern India and northern Bangladesh) and northern Middle East (northern Saudi Arabia, Qatar , Bahrain , northern United Arab Emirates, Iraq , Iran , Afghanistan , the Levant ( Syria , Lebanon , Jordan , Israel , Palestine ), and Turkey ).

The South Temperate Zone includes Southern Australia (the southern regions of the Australian states of Western Australia and Queensland, the southern regions of the Northern Territory, and the entire territories of the states of New South Wales , South Australia , Tasmania and Victoria ), great part of Zealandia ( New Zealand ), southern South America (large part of the Southern Cone), and Southern Africa (southern Namibia, southern Botswana, great part of South Africa , the entire territories of Lesotho and Eswatini , and the southern tips of Mozambique and Madagascar ).

Frigid zones [ edit ] The two frigid zones, or polar regions , experience the midnight sun and the polar night for part of the year – at the edge of the zone there remains one day, the winter solstice , when the Sun is too low to rise, and one day at the summer solstice when the Sun remains above the horizon for 24 hours. In the center of the zone (the pole ), the day is one year long, with six months of daylight and six months of night. The frigid zones are the coldest regions of Earth and are generally covered in ice and snow. It receives slanting rays of the Sun, as this region lies farthest from the equator. Summer in this region lasts for about 2 to 3 months, and there is almost 24-hour sunlight during summer.  The sun's rays are always slanting, so provide less heat per horizontal surface area.

The North Frigid Zone includes the United States (only the state of Alaska ), the northern regions of Canada (the Northwest Territories , Nunavut , and Yukon ), Greenland ( Denmark ), Norway , Finland , Sweden , and Russia .

The South Frigid Zone includes only Antarctica .

History [ edit ] The concept of a geographical zone was first hypothesized by the ancient Greek scholar Parmenides [ 3 ] and lastingly modified by Aristotle .

[ 4 ] Both philosophers theorized the Earth divided into three types of climatic zones based on their distance from the equator.

Like Parmeneides, thinking that the area near the equator was too hot for habitation, Aristotle dubbed the region around the equator (from 23.5° N to 23.5° S) the "Torrid Zone." Both philosophers reasoned the region from the Arctic Circle to the pole to be permanently frozen. This region thought uninhabitable, was called the "Frigid Zone." The only area believed to be habitable was the northern "Temperate Zone" (the southern one not having been discovered), lying between the "Frigid Zones" and the "Torrid Zone". However, humans have inhabited almost all climates on Earth, including inside the Arctic Circle.

As knowledge of the Earth's geography improved, a second "Temperate Zone" was discovered south of the equator, and a second "Frigid Zone" was discovered around the Antarctic . Although Aristotle's map was oversimplified, the general idea was correct. Today, the most commonly used climate map is the Köppen climate classification , developed by Russian climatologist of German descent and amateur botanist Wladimir Köppen (1846–1940), which divides the world into five major climate regions, based on average annual precipitation, average monthly precipitation, and average monthly temperature.

A Köppen–Geiger climate map (1991-2020) See also [ edit ] Circle of latitude Climate classification Clime Hardiness zone Polar regions of Earth Subtropics Temperate climate Tropics References and footnotes [ edit ] ^ "The Five Geographical Zones Of The World" .

WorldAtlas . Retrieved 2019-09-17 .

^ "Vietnam Climate" .

WorldData.info . Retrieved 2023-11-24 .

^ Strab. 2,2,1-2 in: A. H. Coxon and R. D. McKirahan (eds), The Fragments of Parmenides: A Critical Text With Introduction, and Translation, the Ancient Testimonia and a Commentary, 2nd edn (Phresis: Supplementary Volumes 3; Assen, Dover (NH), 2009), p. 160.

^ Aristotle, Meteorology , Bekker numbers 362a33-362b29 ^ The "Sun passing", "reaching" or similar, implying a movement of the sun, is – in the widest context – conflating subject with object.

Astronomy, although it treats the Sun from the Earth's perspective with global, cyclical, limited northward and southern migration (in the sky, the celestial sphere ), proves this is due to Earth's axial tilt , and its unlimited east-west movement is due to the Earth's orbit . If seeing and analyzing Earth and the Sun in space
, Earth moves such that a geographical zone faces the Sun more or less at a certain date, or moves to align beneath the Sun, due to tilt, a particular latitude.

v t e Earth 's primary regions and subregions Worlds Down Under New World Old World Three/Four Worlds First World Second World Third World Fourth World Hemispheres Eastern Land Hemisphere Northern Southern Water Hemisphere Western Landmasses Africa-Eurasia Eurasia Americas Antarctica Australia Zealandia submerged Tectonic plates Continents Africa North Maghreb Sub-Saharan Central East Horn Great Lakes Southern West Antarctica East Antarctica Antarctic Plateau Transantarctic Mountains West Antarctica Antarctic Peninsula Asia East Northeast Southeast Mainland Maritime Central Aral Sea Aralkum Desert Caspian Sea North Siberia Ural Russian Far East Northeast South Indian subcontinent Subregions West Arabian Peninsula Caucasus South Caucasus Levant Dead Sea Levantine corridor Levantine Sea Near East Other regions Himalayan Himalayan states Indian region Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Europe Eastern Balkans Caucasus North Caucasus South Caucasus Southern Russia European Russia Southeastern Northern Baltic British Isles Nordic Northwestern Scandinavia Scandinavian Peninsula Southern Mediterranean Middle East Italy Italian peninsula South-eastern Balkan Peninsula South-western Iberian Peninsula Western Atlantic Low Countries Northwestern Other regions Central Europe By language Celtic Germanic Romance Slavic Macaronesia North America Northern America Greenland Great Lakes Pacific Northwest United States Appalachia Bible Belt Eastern East Coast Northern Southeast Southwest U.S. Census regions Northeastern New England Mid-Atlantic Midwest South Western Mountain Pacific Canada Atlantic Canadian Prairies Central Eastern Northern Western Middle America Aridoamerica Greater Caribbean Caribbean West Indies Central Am.

Mesoamerica Northern Mexico Oceania Australasia Australia Mainland Australia New Guinea Tasmania Zealandia Melanesia Island Melanesia Micronesia Near Oceania Polynesia Remote Oceania South America Amazon Plain Amazon Basin Amazon Rainforest Andean States Brazilian Highlands Caribbean South America The Guianas Southern Cone Patagonia Geopolitical regions Global East Heartland North Northeast Northwest South Southeast Southwest West Asia–Pacific Far East Pacific Asia Sinosphere Greater China Indosphere Greater India Europe, the Middle East and Africa Mediterranean Greater Middle East Middle East and North Africa Middle East Arab world Mashriq Maghreb Greater Iran Iranian plateau Americas Anglo Dutch French Latin America and the Caribbean Latin Ibero Hispanic Portuguese Islands By continent Africa Americas North America Caribbean Central America South America Antarctica Asia Europe by area by population Oceania Australia New Zealand By ocean Arctic Atlantic Baltic Sea Black Sea Caribbean Sea Irish Sea Mediterranean Sea Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Ionian Sea Indian Persian Gulf Pacific East China Sea South China Sea Southern Oceans Antarctic/Southern Antarctic Convergence Arctic Atlantic Indian Pacific Great Barrier Reef Mariana Trench Challenger Deep Ring of Fire World Ocean Other waterbodies Lakes lists Rivers Seas Rim Arctic Atlantic Indo-Mediterranean Indian Ocean Mediterranean Pacific Polar Antarctic Arctic Continents of Earth / List of seas / Physical Earth NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐pwvwb
Cached time: 20250812021929
Cache expiry: 2446
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.404 seconds
Real time usage: 0.576 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2023/1000000
Revision size: 10507/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 133905/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2807/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 22608/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.217/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5613209/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  395.898      1 -total
 39.69%  157.115     13 Template:Navbox
 30.63%  121.256      1 Template:Regions_of_the_world
 25.75%  101.930      2 Template:Reflist
 22.27%   88.177      2 Template:Cite_web
 16.66%   65.971      1 Template:Short_description
 14.83%   58.694      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 13.68%   54.165      1 Template:Ambox
 10.08%   39.909      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.16%   20.413      8 Template:Circle_of_latitude Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:8782181:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812021929 and revision id 1289567774. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geographical_zone&oldid=1289567774 " Category : Geographical zones Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2011 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 9 May 2025, at 12:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geographical zone 31 languages Add topic

