Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Features 2 Quantification 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ruderal species 15 languages العربية Беларуская Boarisch Català Eesti Español فارسی Français עברית Lietuvių 日本語 Polski Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Ruderal ) Plant species that is first to colonize disturbed lands This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Ruderal species" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2023 ) A single-species ruderal community of Dittrichia viscosa on gravel near Petah Tikva -Sgula railway station, Israel . (Compare with mixed-species image below.) A ruderal species is a plant species that is first to colonize disturbed lands. The disturbance may be natural –  for example, wildfires or avalanches – or the consequences of human activities, such as construction ( of roads , of buildings , mining , etc.) or agriculture (abandoned fields, irrigation , etc.).

The term ruderal originates from the Latin word rudus , meaning " rubble ".

Ruderal species typically dominate the disturbed area for a few years, gradually losing the competition to other native species. However, in extreme disturbance circumstances, such as when the natural topsoil is covered with a foreign substance, a single-species ruderal community may become permanently established. In addition, some ruderal invasive species may have such a competitive advantage over the native species that they, too, may permanently prevent a disturbed area from returning to its original state despite natural topsoil.

Features [ edit ] Features contributing to a species' success as ruderal are: Massive seed production Seedlings whose nutritional requirements are modest Fast-growing roots [ citation needed ] Independence of mycorrhizae [ citation needed ] Polyploidy Quantification [ edit ] Ecologists have proposed various scales for quantifying ruderality, which can be defined as the "ability to thrive where there is disturbance through partial or total destruction of plant biomass" (Grime, Hodgson & Hunt, 1988).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The ruderality scale of Grime presents values that are readily available, and it takes into account disturbance factors as well as other indicators such as the annual or perennial character of the plants.

See also [ edit ] A mixed-species ruderal community on the side of Israel's road 40, north of the Yarkon River , where topsoil was left after the road-building activity.

Edge effect Hemeroby Hemerochory Adventive plant Pioneer species Restoration ecology Supertramp (ecology) Examples of  ruderal species: Cannabis ruderalis (family Cannabaceae ) Conyza bonariensis (family Asteraceae ) Dittrichia viscosa ( Asteraceae ) Nicotiana glauca ( Solanaceae ) References [ edit ] ^ Grime, J. P.; Hodgson, J. G.; Hunt, R. (1988).

Comparative Plant Ecology . Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-017-1094-7 .

ISBN 978-0-412-74170-8 .

^ Hill, M.O.; Roy, D.B.; Thompson, K. (2002).

"Hemeroby, urbanity and ruderality: bioindicators of disturbance and human impact" .

Journal of Applied Ecology .

39 (5): 708– 720.

Bibcode : 2002JApEc..39..708H .

doi : 10.1046/j.1365-2664.2002.00746.x .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Ruderal species at Wikimedia Commons St. John TV. 1987. SOIL DISTURBANCE AND THE MINERAL NUTRITION OF NATIVE PLANTS in Proceedings of the 2nd Native Plant Revegetation Symposium Archived 2006-01-18 at the Wayback Machine Chapin. FS. III. 1980. The mineral nutrition of wild plants. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst., 11:233–260.

Archived 2008-12-17 at the Wayback Machine "Ruderal" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 23 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 814.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ruderal_species&oldid=1301380480 " Categories : Ruderal species Ecology terminology Habitat Botany Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2023 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2013 Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 13:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ruderal species 15 languages Add topic

