Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Indian sources 2 Tibetan Buddhism Toggle Tibetan Buddhism subsection 2.1 In the Nyingma (Ancient) school 2.2 In the Sarma (New Translation) traditions 3 In East Asian Buddhism 4 In Vaishnavism 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Citations 6.2 Works cited 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Adi-Buddha 25 languages العربية বাংলা བོད་ཡིག Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia First or Primordial Buddha Vajradhara , the main Ādibuddha, depicted in the Sarma (New Translation) schools of Tibetan Buddhism Part of a series on Vajrayana Buddhism Traditions Historical traditions: Ari-Acharya Burmese-Bengal † Yunnan Indonesian Esoteric Buddhism † Filipino Esoteric Buddhism † East Asian Chinese Japanese Nepalese Inner Asian Altaic ( o , x , y ) Bhutanese Eurasian ( b , t , k ) Tibetan New branches: Gateway of the Hidden Flower Shambhala Buddhism History Tantrism Mahasiddha Sahaja Pursuit Buddhahood Bodhisattva Kalachakra Practices Generation stage Completion stage Phowa Tukdam Tantric techniques : Fourfold division: Kriyayoga Charyayoga Yogatantra Anuttarayogatantra Twofold division: Inner Tantras Outer Tantras Thought forms and visualisation: Mandala Mantra Mudra Thangka Yantra Yoga : Ngöndro Guru yoga Deity yoga Six yogas : Inner heat Luminosity yoga Dream yoga Death yoga Sex yoga Festivals Ganachakra Ullambana Puja Tantric texts Anuttarayoga Tantra Cakrasaṃvara Tantra Guhyagarbha Tantra Kulayarāja Tantra Mahāmāyā Tantra Mañjuśrī-mūla-kalpa Mañjuśrīnāmasamgīti Tattvasaṃgraha Tantra Vajrasekhara Sutra Yuthok Nyingthig Symbols and tools Damaru Ghanta Melong Phurba Vajra Yab-Yum Ordination and transmission Esoteric transmission Pointing-out instruction Samaya Vajracharya v t e The Ādi-Buddha ( Tibetan : དང་པོའི་སངས་རྒྱས། , Wylie : dang po'i sangs rgyas , THL : Dangpö Sanggyé , Ch: 本佛, Jp: honbutsu, First Buddha, Original Buddha, or Primordial Buddha ) is a Mahayana Buddhist concept referring to the most fundamental, supreme, or ancient Buddha in the cosmos.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Another common term for this figure is Dharmakāya Buddha.

[ 3 ] The term emerges in tantric Buddhist literature , most prominently in the Kalachakra . "Ādi" means "first", such that the Ādibuddha was the first to attain Buddhahood . "Ādi" can also mean "primordial", not referring to a person but to an innate wisdom that is present in all sentient beings.

[ 4 ] In East Asian Buddhism , the term 本佛 (běn fó, original Buddha, root Buddha) also appears in the works of Tiantai and Tendai school, referring to the original Buddha of the Lotus Sutra which was also later identified with the cosmic Buddha Mahavairocana . It and similar terms were also used in the traditions of Chinese Esoteric Buddhism and Shingon to refer to the cosmic Buddha Mahavairocana .

Indian sources [ edit ] According to D.T. Suzuki, the Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra uses various terms for the dharmakāya , including Dharma-buddha, Dharmatā-buddha, Mūlatathāgata, and the Tathatājñāna-buddha.

[ 5 ] This is one of the earliest pre-tantric discussions of a "root Buddha" (Mūlatathāgata) or Dharmakāya Buddha, a Buddha which corresponds to the Dharmakāya , the ultimate Buddha body.

[ 5 ] Various Indian Buddhist tantric works refer to an Ādibuddha, such as the Kalachakra Tantra , where it refers to the ultimate Buddha-nature and Buddha-wisdom or awakened gnosis (buddha- jñana ).

[ 1 ] [ 6 ] In the Guhyasamāja Tantra , the Buddha Vajradhāra (the " Vajra holder") is referred to as: the Teacher, who is bowed to by all the Buddhas, best of the three vajras , best of the great best, supreme lord of the three vajras.

[ 1 ] Vesna Wallace describes the concept of Ādibuddha in the Kalachakra tradition as follows: when the Kalacakra tradition speaks of the Ādibuddha in the sense of a beginningless and endless Buddha, it is referring to the innate gnosis that pervades the minds of all sentient beings and stands as the basis of both samsara and nirvana. Whereas, when it speaks of the Ādibuddha as the one who first attained perfect enlightenment by means of imperishable bliss, and when it asserts the necessity of acquiring merit and knowledge in order to attain perfect Buddhahood, it is referring to the actual realization of one's own innate gnosis. Thus, one could say that in the Kalacakra tradition, Ādibuddha refers to the ultimate nature of one's own mind and to the one who has realized the innate nature of one's own mind by means of purificatory practices.

[ 6 ] There was also a tradition in India which saw Mañjuśrī as the Ādibuddha, as exemplified by Vilāsavajra's commentary to the Mañjuśrīnāmasamgīti .

[ 7 ] Vilāsavajra states in his commentary: The gnosis-being Mañjuśrī is not the bodhisattva who is the master of the ten stages ( bhumi ). Rather, he is the non-dual gnosis ( advayajñāna ), the perfection of wisdom ( prajñāpāramitā ) itself.

[ 8 ] According to Anthony Tribe, this tradition may have influenced the Jñānapāda tradition of Guhyasamāja exegesis, which places Mañjuvajra (a tantric form of Mañjuśrī) at the center of the Guhyasamāja mandala.

[ 8 ] Tibetan Buddhism [ edit ] In Indo-Tibetan Buddhism , the Ādibuddha is most often expressed as one of three forms: the primordial Buddha Samantabhadra in the Nyingma and Bön traditions (not to be confused with the bodhisattva Samantabhadra ), the ultimate Buddha Vajradhara in the Kagyu , Gelug and Sakya traditions, or the supreme manifestation of Buddhahood Kalachakra in the Jonang tradition.

[ 1 ] While each tradition has its own principal form of the Adibuddha (Samantabhadra, Vajradhara or Kalachakra), the Rime movement (impartiality, universality) has resulted in each tradition acknowledging and even practicing the tantras originating within other traditions.

[ 9 ] In the Nyingma (Ancient) school [ edit ] A painting depicting Samantabhadra in union with his consort Samantabhadri .

In the Nyingma school, the Adi-Buddha is called Samantabhadra (Skt.; Tib. ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོ་, Kuntu Zangpo ; Wyl.

kun tu bzang po ), not to be confused with the bodhisattva Samantabhadra . Nyingma art often depicts this figure as a naked blue Buddha. According to Dzogchen Ponlop : The color blue symbolizes the expansive, unchanging quality of space, which is the ground of all arisings, the basis of all appearances, and the source of all phenomena. The absence of robes symbolizes the genuine reality beyond any dualistic, conceptual, or philosophical clothing. That is the dharmakaya buddha: the genuine body of absolute truth.

[ 10 ] In Nyingma, Samantabhadra is also considered to be the source of all Dzogchen teachings.

[ 10 ] The Kunjed Gyalpo Tantra calls Samantabhadra the "All-Creating King" (Tib.

Kunjed Gyalpo ), because all phenomena are said to be manifestations or displays of Samantabhadra. According to Namkhai Norbu , this does not mean there is some being called Samantabhadra that creates the universe, instead what it refers to is that all things arise from "the state of consciousness Samantabhadra, the state of Dharmakaya ." [ 11 ] In this sense, Samantabhadra is seen as being a symbolic personification of the ground or basis ( ghzi ) in Dzogchen thought.

[ 12 ] Namkhai Norbu explains that the Dzogchen idea of the Adi-Buddha Samantabhadra "should be mainly understood as a metaphor to enable us to discover our real condition." He further adds that: If we deem Samantabhadra an individual being, we are far from the true meaning. In reality, he denotes our potentiality that, even though at the present moment we are in samsara, has never been conditioned by dualism. From the beginning, the state of the individual has been pure and always remains pure: this is what Samantabhadra represents. But when we fall into conditioning, it is as if we are no longer Samantabhadra because we are ignorant of our true nature. So what is called the primordial Buddha, or Adibuddha, is only a metaphor for our true condition.

[ 13 ] Karl Brunnhölzl states: Longchenpa's Treasure Trove of Scriptures ...explains that Samantabhadra—one of the most common Dzogchen names for the state of original buddhahood—is nothing other than the primordial, innate awareness that is naturally free, even before any notions of "buddhas" or "sentient beings" have emerged.

[ 14 ] In Dzogchen thought, there are said to be five aspects of Samantabhadra.

Longchenpa explains these as follows: Samantabhadra as teacher: "Means that all buddhas while residing in the forms of the sambhogakaya and the dharmakaya in Akaniṣṭha , promote the welfare of all sentient beings through sending forth countless emanations to all the distinct realms of those to be guided." [ 15 ] Samantabhadra as ground: "Is the dharmata of all phenomena — suchness. This is also called "Samantabhadra as nature".

[ 15 ] Samantabhadra as adornment: "The appearance of all phenomena, which are self-arising as the play of the bearers of the nature of phenomena. This consists of all that is completely pure, in that its nature is illusory." [ 15 ] Samantabhadra as awareness: "self arising wisdom, the sugata heart," i.e. the Buddha-nature described in the Uttaratantra .

[ 15 ] Samantabhadra as realization: "The fundamental basic nature. Through realizing it well, the eyes of freedom are found. This is also called "Samantabhadra as the path." [ 15 ] In the Sarma (New Translation) traditions [ edit ] The Sarma schools of Tibetan Buddhism generally practice Indian tantras like the Kalacakra Tantra and the Guhyasamāja Tantra and their commentaries. In these Indian works, the Ādibuddha takes various forms, including Vajradhara, Kalacakra, Manjuvajra, Aksobhya , and Hevajra . The most universal depiction of the Ādibuddha in the Sarma schools is as Vajradhara , but different tantras depict the Ādibuddha differently (emphasizing different aspects of Buddhahood) resulting in many names for this underlying, primordial Buddha.

Alex Wayman notes that the Pradīpoddyotana , a tantric commentary, explains that the "three vajras" are the three mysteries of Body, Speech, and Mind, which are the displays of the Ādibuddha. Wayman further writes: Tsong-kha-pa 's Mchan-'grel explains the "lord of body": displays simultaneously innumerable materializations of body; "lord of speech": teaches the Dharma simultaneously to boundless sentient beings each in his own language; "lord of mind": understands all the knowable which seems impossible.

[ 1 ] According to the 14th Dalai Lama , the Ādibuddha is also seen in Mahayana Buddhism as the "ultimate reality", the "ultimate source", and the "clear light".

[ 16 ] He states that, "If a sutra describes the Primordial Buddha as an autonomous entity, we must be able to interpret the assertion without taking it literally." [ 17 ] In East Asian Buddhism [ edit ] 12th century painting of Mahāvairocana, Heian period, collecting in Nezu Museum The term 本佛 (běn fó, original Buddha, root Buddha) appears in the works of Tiantai and Tendai school, referring to the original Buddha of the Lotus Sutra 's Original Gate (本門) teaching, which was also later identified with the cosmic Buddha Mahavairocana . In Tendai and most sects of Nichiren Buddhism , it is considered that the Lotus Sutra 's Essential Teaching section (chapters 15-28) reveals the "Original Buddha", the ultimate Buddha who has always been enlightened and will never pass away (though he may appear to do so as a skillful means ).

[ 18 ] The term also referred to buddha-nature , the originally enlightened nature in all beings.

[ 19 ] In Chinese Esoteric Buddhism , and in Japanese Shingon , the Ādibuddha is typically considered to be Mahāvairocana .

[ 4 ] In Japanese Shingon Buddhism, the terms Primordial body ( honji-shin ) and Dharmakaya principle ( riho-jin ) are used to refer to the Ādibuddha. It is also associated with the letter A, the first letter of the Siddham Alphabet, and is seen as the source of the universe.

[ 20 ] Śubhakarasiṃha's Darijing shu (J.

Dainichikyōsho ; 大日經疏) states that Mahāvairocana (teacher of the Mahāvairocanābhisaṃbodhi-sūtra ), is “the original ground dharmakāya.” (薄伽梵即毘盧遮那本地法身, at Taisho no. 1796:39.580). This is the position followed by Kūkai, the founder of Shingon, who says in his Dainichikyō kaidai that “Mahāvairocana is the self-nature Dharmakāya, which is the intrinsic truth-body of original awakening ,” (大毗盧遮那者自性法身卽本有本覺理身).

Meanwhile, in the Japanese Jōdo Shinshū school, Amitabha Buddha ("Amida") is seen as being the "Supreme Buddha" or the One Original buddha ( ichi-butsu ).

[ 21 ] Certain authors of the Shingon and Tendai school also saw Amida Buddha as the original Buddha. The Shingon monk Dōhan (1179-1252) was one of the first figures to explicitly identify Amida Buddha with Mahāvairocana Buddha in his Himitsu nenbutsu shō .

[ 22 ] In a similar fashion, Kōshū (1276-1350), a master of the Eshin lineage, also discussed the view that Amida can be identified with the original Buddha of the esoteric tradition in his Keiran shūyōshū .

[ 22 ] The Nikko -lineage of Nichiren Shoshu regard Nichiren himself as the Ādibuddha and dispute the contentions of other sects that view him as a mere bodhisattva .

[ 18 ] In Vaishnavism [ edit ] Further information: Gautama Buddha in Hinduism In the Medieval Orissan School of Vaishnavism , Jagannath was believed to be the first Buddha avatar of Vishnu , or Adi-Buddha; with Gautama Buddha and Chaitanya Mahaprabhu being further incarnations of the Buddha-Jagannath.

[ 23 ] Gurus of Gaudiya Vaishnavaism argue that epithets for the Buddha like Sugata Buddha and Adi Buddha refer to the 9th avatar among the Dashavataras of Vishnu, who was a different person from Gautama Buddha, based on Amarakosha and other Buddhist texts.

[ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Divine presence Sanghyang Adi Buddha References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Wayman 2013 , p. 53.

^ 本佛 Original Buddha , Digital Dictionary of Buddhism ^ Gray 2007 , p. 32.

^ a b Buswell & Lopez 2013 .

^ a b Xing, Guang (2005).

The Concept of the Buddha: Its Evolution from Early Buddhism to the Trikāya Theory, p. 257. Psychology Press. ISBN 978-0-415-33344-3.

^ a b Wallace 2001 , p. 18.

^ Tribe 2016 , p. 3.

^ a b Tribe 2016 , p. 8.

^ https://kalachakranet.org/kalachakra_tantra_introduction.html [ bare URL ] ^ a b Dzogchen Ponlop 2003 , p. 180.

^ Norbu & Clemente 1999 , p. 94.

^ Neumaier-Dargyay 1993 , pp. 61, 84, 101, 105; Dalai Lama 2020 , p. 188.

^ Norbu & Clemente 1999 , p. 233.

^ Brunnhölzl 2018 , p. 17.

^ a b c d e Brunnhölzl 2018 , p. 18.

^ Dalai Lama 1996 , p. 153–4.

^ Dalai Lama 1996 , p. 156.

^ a b Chryssides 2012 , p. 251.

^ "本佛 | Dictionary | Buddhistdoor" .

www2.buddhistdoor.net . Retrieved 2025-03-21 .

^ Verdu 1981 , p. 116.

^ Getty 1988 , p. 41.

^ a b Proffitt, A. P. (2020). Nenbutsu Orthodoxies in Medieval Japan.

Japanese Journal of Religious Studies , 47 (1), 135–160. https://doi.org/10.18874/jjrs.47.1.2020.135-160 ^ Mukherjee 1940 , pp. 153–169.

^ Keshava 2003 ; Tirtha 2018 .

Works cited [ edit ] Brunnhölzl, Karl (2018).

A Lullaby to Awaken the Heart: The Aspiration Prayer of Samantabhadra and Its Commentaries . Simon and Schuster.

[ ISBN missing ] Buswell, Robert E.; Lopez, Donald S., Jr. (2013). "ādibuddha".

The Princeton Dictionary of Buddhism . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4008-4805-8 .

{{ cite encyclopedia }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Chryssides, George D. (2012).

Historical Dictionary of New Religious Movements (2nd ed.). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0-8108-6194-7 .

Dalai Lama (1996). Dresser, Marianne (ed.).

Beyond Dogma: Dialogues and Discourses . North Atlantic Books.

ISBN 978-1-55643-218-7 .

Dalai Lama (2020).

Dzogchen: Heart Essence of the Great Perfection . Shambhala Publications.

[ ISBN missing ] Dzogchen Ponlop (2003).

Wild Awakening: The Heart of Mahamudra and Dzogchen . Shambhala Publications.

[ ISBN missing ] Getty, Alice (1988).

The Gods of Northern Buddhism: Their History and Iconography . Courier Corporation.

[ ISBN missing ] Gray, David (2007).

The Cakrasamvara Tantra (The Discourse of Sri Heruka): Śrīherukābhidhāna: A Study and Annotated Translation . Treasury of the Buddhist Sciences.

[ full citation needed ] Keshava, Bhakti Prajnan (2003). "Two Buddhas".

Beyond Nirvana: The Philosophy of Mayavadism . Gaudiya Vedanta Publications. pp.

42– 49.

Mukherjee, Prabhat (1940).

The History Of Medieval Vaishnavism In Orissa . Calcutta: R. Chatterji.

Neumaier-Dargyay, E. K. (tr.) (1993).

The Sovereign All-Creating Mind . Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications.

[ ISBN missing ] Norbu, Namkhai; Clemente, Adriano (1999).

The Supreme Source: The Kunjed Gyalpo, the Fundamental Tantra of Dzogchen Semde . Snow Lion Publications.

[ ISBN missing ] Tirtha, Bhakti Ballabh (2018). "Sri Buddha-Avatara".

Dasavatara: Ten Manifestations of Godhead . Mandala Publications. pp.

184– 197.

ISBN 978-1-932771-82-4 .

Tribe, Anthony (2016).

Tantric Buddhist Practice in India: Vilāsavajra's commentary on the Mañjuśrī-nāmasaṃgīti . Routledge.

[ ISBN missing ] Verdu, A. (1981).

The Philosophy of Buddhism: A "Totalistic" Synthesis . Springer Science & Business Media.

[ ISBN missing ] Wallace, Vesna (2001).

The Inner Kalacakratantra: A Buddhist Tantric View of the Individual . Oxford University Press.

[ ISBN missing ] Wayman, Alex (2013).

The Buddhist Tantras: Light on Indo-Tibetan Esotericism . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-135-02922-7 .

Further reading [ edit ] Grönbold, Günter (1995). "Weitere Adibuddha-Texte".

Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens [ Vienna Journal of South Asian Studies ] (in German).

39 : 45– 60.

JSTOR 24007813 .

v t e Topics in Buddhism Outline Glossary Index Foundations Four Noble Truths Three Jewels Buddha Dharma Sangha Noble Eightfold Path Nirvana Middle Way The Buddha Tathāgata Birthday Four sights Eight Great Events Great Renunciation Physical characteristics Life of Buddha in art Footprint Relics Iconography in Laos and Thailand Films Miracles Family Suddhodāna (father) Māyā (mother) Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother) Yaśodharā (wife) Rāhula (son) Ānanda (cousin) Devadatta (cousin) Bodhi tree Places where the Buddha stayed Buddha in world religions Bodhisattvas Avalokiteśvara Guanyin Mañjuśrī Mahāsthāmaprāpta Ākāśagarbha Kṣitigarbha Samantabhadra Vajrapāṇi Skanda Tārā Metteyya/Maitreya Disciples Kaundinya Assaji Sāriputta Mahamoggallāna Ānanda Mahākassapa Aṅgulimāla Anuruddha Mahākaccana Nanda Subhūti Puṇṇa Mantānīputta Upāli Mahapajapati Gotamī Khema Uppalavanna Asita Channa Yasa Key concepts Avidyā (Ignorance) Bardo Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Dhamma theory Dharma Enlightenment Five hindrances Indriya Karma Kleshas Mental factors Mindstream Parinirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Rebirth Saṃsāra Saṅkhāra Skandha Śūnyatā Taṇhā (Craving) Tathātā Ten Fetters Three marks of existence Anicca Dukkha Anattā Two truths doctrine Cosmology Ten spiritual realms Six Paths Deva realm Human realm Asura realm Hungry Ghost realm Animal realm Naraka Three planes of existence Branches Mahayana Zen Chinese Chan Japanese Zen Korean Seon Vietnamese Thiền Pure Land Tiantai Huayan Risshū Nichiren Madhyamaka Yogachara Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhism Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Shingon Dzogchen Theravada Southern Esoteric Buddhism Navayana Early Buddhist schools Pre-sectarian Buddhism Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna Southern, Eastern and Northern Buddhism Practices Bhavana Bodhipakkhiyādhammā Brahmavihara Mettā Karuṇā Mudita Upekkha Buddhābhiṣeka Dāna Devotion Deity yoga Dhyāna Faith Five Strengths Iddhipada Meditation Mantras Kammaṭṭhāna Recollection Smarana Anapanasati Samatha-vipassanā ( Vipassana movement ) Shikantaza Zazen Tukdam Koan Ganana Mandala Tonglen Tantra Tertön Terma Merit Mindfulness Mindful Yoga Satipatthana Nekkhamma Nianfo Pāramitā Paritta Puja Offerings Prostration Music Refuge Sādhu Satya Sacca Seven Factors of Enlightenment Sati Dhamma vicaya Pīti Passaddhi Śīla Five precepts Eight precepts Bodhisattva vow Pratimokṣa Threefold Training Śīla Samadhi Prajñā Vīrya Four Right Exertions Twenty-two vows of Ambedkar Yujia Yankou Shuilu Fahui Nirvana Bodhi Bodhisattva Buddhahood Pratyekabuddhayāna Four stages of awakening Sotāpanna Sakadagami Anāgāmi Arhat Monasticism Bhikkhu Bhikkhunī Śrāmaṇera Śrāmaṇerī Anagārika Ajahn Sayadaw Zen master Rōshi Lama Rinpoche Geshe Tulku Western tulku Kappiya Donchee Householder Upāsaka and Upāsikā Achar Śrāvaka Ten principal disciples Shaolin Monastery Major figures The Buddha Nagasena Aśvaghoṣa Nagarjuna Asanga Vasubandhu Kumārajīva Buddhaghosa Buddhapālita Dignāga Bodhidharma Zhiyi Emperor Wen of Sui Songtsen Gampo Xuanzang Shandao Padmasambhava Saraha Atiśa Naropa Karmapa Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Shamarpa Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Ajahn Mun B. R. Ambedkar Ajahn Chah Thích Nhất Hạnh Texts Early Buddhist texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana sutras Pali Canon Chinese Buddhist canon Tibetan Buddhist canon Dhammapada Sutra Vinaya Madhyamakālaṃkāra Abhidharmadīpa Countries Afghanistan Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bhutan Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Canada China Costa Rica Croatia Czech Republic Denmark England Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Korea Kyrgyzstan Laos Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Maldives Malaysia Mexico Middle East Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Scotland Senegal Singapore Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Tibet Ukraine United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela Vietnam Wales Zimbabwe History Timeline Ashoka Kanishka Buddhist councils History of Buddhism in India Decline of Buddhism in India Huichang persecution of Buddhism Greco-Buddhism Gandharan Buddhism Texts Menander I Buddhism and the Roman world Buddhism in the West Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Persecution of Buddhists In Afghanistan In Vietnam Rimé movement Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal Dalit Buddhist movement Chinese invasion of Tibet 1959 Tibetan uprising Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist modernism Vipassana movement 969 Movement Engaged Buddhism Women in Buddhism Philosophy Abhidharma Atomism Buddhology Creator Buddhism and democracy Economics Eight Consciousnesses Engaged Buddhism Eschatology Ethics Evolution Humanism Logic Reality Secular Buddhism Socialism The unanswerable questions Culture Architecture Temple Vihāra Kyaung Wat Ordination hall Stupa Pagoda Burmese pagoda Candi Dzong architecture List of Buddhist architecture in China Japanese Buddhist architecture Buddhist temples in Korea Thai temple art and architecture Tibetan Buddhist architecture Art Greco-Buddhist Budai Buddha in art Calendar Cuisine Funeral Holidays Vesak Uposatha Māgha Pūjā Asalha Puja Vassa Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Kasaya Mahabodhi Temple Mantra Om mani padme hum Mudra Music Pilgrimage Lumbini Maya Devi Temple Bodh Gaya Sarnath Kushinagar Poetry Prayer beads Hama yumi Prayer wheel Symbolism Dharmachakra Flag Bhavacakra Swastika Thangka Temple of the Tooth Vegetarianism Miscellaneous Abhijñā Amitābha Brahmā Dharma talk Hinayana Iddhi Kalpa Koliya Lineage Māra Siddhi Sacred languages Pāḷi Sanskrit Comparison Baháʼí Faith Christianity Influences Comparison East Asian religions Gnosticism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Psychology Science Theosophy Violence Western philosophy Lists Bodhisattvas Buddhas Buddhists American Korean Indian Suttas Sutras Temples Festivals Category Buddhism portal Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Adi-Buddha&oldid=1305937236 " Categories : Buddhas Dzogchen Hidden categories: All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from August 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Standard Tibetan-language text Pages with missing ISBNs CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from August 2024 CS1 German-language sources (de) This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 00:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Adi-Buddha 25 languages Add topic

