Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Climate 2 Geography 3 Classifications Toggle Classifications subsection 3.1 UN geoscheme classification 3.2 EuroVoc 3.3 CIA World Factbook 3.4 World Geographical Scheme for Recording Plant Distributions 4 Demographics Toggle Demographics subsection 4.1 Language 4.2 Religion 5 Regional cooperation 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Northern Europe 118 languages Acèh Afrikaans አማርኛ العربية Arpetan Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaelg Gagauz Galego ГӀалгӀай 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kotava ລາວ Latgaļu Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova La .lojban.

Magyar Македонски Malagasy मराठी მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Перем коми Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русиньскый Русский Sardu Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Walon 文言 West-Vlams Winaray Wolof 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws 中文 Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Northern region of the European continent Not to be confused with Nordic countries .

A composed satellite photograph of islands and continental areas in and surrounding the North Sea and Baltic Sea The northern region of Europe has several definitions. A restrictive definition may describe northern Europe as being roughly north of the southern coast of the Baltic Sea , which is about 54°N , or may be based on other geographical factors such as climate and ecology .

Climate [ edit ] European climate. The Köppen climate classification map is presented by the Climatic Research Unit of the University of East Anglia and the Global Precipitation Climatology Center of the Deutscher Wetterdienst .

The climate is mainly Oceanic climate (Cfb), Humid continental climate (Dfb), Subarctic climate (Dfc and Dsc) and Tundra (ET).

Geography [ edit ] Main articles: British Isles , Scandinavian Peninsula , Fennoscandia , Jutland , and Baltic region Northern Europe might be defined roughly to include some or all of the following areas: British Isles , Fennoscandia , the peninsula of Jutland , the Baltic plain that lies to the east, and the many islands that lie offshore from mainland northern Europe and the main European continent. In some cases, Greenland is also included, although it is only politically European, comprising part of the Kingdom of Denmark , and not considered to be geographically in Europe.

The area is partly mountainous, including the northern volcanic islands of Iceland and Jan Mayen , and the mountainous western seaboard, Scotland and Scandinavia , and also often includes part of the large plain east of the Baltic Sea .

The entire region's climate is at least mildly affected by the Gulf Stream . From the west climates vary from maritime and maritime subarctic climates. In the north and central climates are generally subarctic or Arctic and to the east climates are mostly subarctic and temperate / continental .

Just as both climate and relief are variable across the region, so too is vegetation, with sparse tundra in the north and high mountains, boreal forest on the north-eastern and central regions temperate coniferous forests (formerly of which a majority was in the Scottish Highlands and south west Norway ) and temperate broadleaf forests growing in the south, west and temperate east.

Classifications [ edit ] There are various definitions of northern Europe which always include the Nordic countries , often the British Isles and Baltic states , and sometimes Greenland .

UN geoscheme classification [ edit ] Subregions of Europe by United Nations geoscheme : Eastern Europe Northern Europe Southern Europe Western Europe The United Nations geoscheme is a system devised by the United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD) which divides the countries of the world into regional and subregional groups, based on the M49 coding classification . The partition is for statistical convenience and does not imply any assumption regarding political or other affiliation of countries or territories.

[ 1 ] In the UN geoscheme, the following countries are classified as being in northern Europe: [ 1 ] Denmark Estonia Finland Iceland Ireland Latvia Lithuania Norway Sweden United Kingdom as well as the dependent areas: Åland Channel Islands Bailiwick of Guernsey Bailiwick of Jersey Faroe Islands Isle of Man Svalbard and Jan Mayen EuroVoc [ edit ] European sub-regions according to EuroVoc : Northern Europe Western Europe Southern Europe Central and Eastern Europe EuroVoc is a multilingual thesaurus maintained by the Publications Office of the European Union , giving definitions of terms for official use. In the definition of "northern Europe", the following countries are included: [ 2 ] Estonia Latvia Lithuania Denmark Finland Iceland Norway Sweden as well as the dependent area: Faroe Islands In this classification Jersey , Guernsey , the Isle of Man , the United Kingdom and Ireland are included in Western Europe .

CIA World Factbook [ edit ] Regions of Europe based on CIA World Factbook : Northern Europe Western Europe Central Europe Southwest Europe Southern Europe Southeast Europe Eastern Europe In the CIA World Factbook , the description of each country includes information about "Location" under the heading "Geography", where the country is classified into a region. The following countries are included in their classification "northern Europe": [ 3 ] Denmark Finland Iceland Norway Sweden as well as the dependent areas: Faroe Islands Jan Mayen Svalbard In this classification Jersey , Guernsey , the Isle of Man , the United Kingdom and Ireland are included in Western Europe , while Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania are included in Eastern Europe .

World Geographical Scheme for Recording Plant Distributions [ edit ] Northern Europe, as defined by the World Geographical Scheme for Recording Plant Distributions The World Geographical Scheme for Recording Plant Distributions is a biogeographical system developed by the international Biodiversity Information Standards (TDWG) organization, formerly the International Working Group on Taxonomic Databases. The WGSRPD standards, like other standards for data fields in botanical databases, were developed to promote "the wider and more effective dissemination of information about the world's heritage of biological organisms for the benefit of the world at large". The system provides clear definitions and codes for recording plant distributions at four scales or levels, from "botanical continents" down to parts of large countries. The following countries are included in their classification of "northern Europe": [ 4 ] Denmark Finland Iceland Ireland Norway Sweden United Kingdom as well as the dependent areas: Åland Faroe Islands Isle of Man Jan Mayen Svalbard Demographics [ edit ] Map of Europe showing the largest religions by region. Islam is represented in green, Eastern Orthodox Christianity in blue, Roman Catholicism in purple, and the other colors represent branches of Protestantism.

Countries in northern Europe generally have developed economies and some of the highest standards of living in the world. They often score highly on surveys measuring quality of life, such as the Human Development Index . Aside from the United Kingdom, they generally have a small population relative to their size, most of whom live in cities. The quality of education in much of Northern Europe is rated highly in international rankings, with Estonia and Finland topping the list among the OECD countries in Europe.

[ citation needed ] Language [ edit ] Germanic languages are widely spoken in northern Europe with North Germanic languages being the most common first language in the Faroe Islands ( Faroese ), [ 5 ] Iceland ( Icelandic ), [ 6 ] Denmark ( Danish ), [ 7 ] Norway ( Norwegian ) [ 8 ] and Sweden ( Swedish ).

[ 9 ] The West Germanic language English is the most common first language in Jersey, Guernsey, the Isle of Man, the United Kingdom and Ireland, however, the West Germanic language Scots is also spoken as a minority language in parts of Scotland and Ireland.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Beyond this, the Finnic languages of Finnish and Estonian are the most common first languages of Finland [ 14 ] and Estonia [ 15 ] respectively. The Baltic languages of Lithuanian and Latvian are the most common first languages of Lithuania [ 16 ] and Latvia [ 17 ] respectively. A number of Celtic languages are spoken in the British Isles including the Brythonic Welsh and the Goidelic Scots Gaelic and Irish . The Celtic languages Cornish and Manx have been revived since becoming classed as extinct, being now spoken to a limited extent in Cornwall and the Isle of Man respectively.

[ 13 ] The Norman languages of Jèrriais and Guernésiais are spoken in Jersey and Guernsey, though are listed as endangered due to the increasing prominence of English in the islands.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] While not the most common first languages in any country, Sámi languages such as North Sámi , Lule Sámi and South Sámi are spoken in the transnational region of Sápmi and are listed as endangered.

[ 13 ] Religion [ edit ] See also: § Reformation outside Germany During the Early Middle Ages , the Roman Catholic Church expanded into northern Europe and spread Christianity among the Germanic peoples .

[ 20 ] Christianity reached the peoples of Scandinavia and the Baltic region in later centuries. The Latin alphabet along with the influence of Western Christianity spread northward from Rome , leading to written English , German , Dutch , Danish , Swedish , Norwegian , Icelandic , Irish , [ 21 ] Scottish , [ 22 ] Welsh , [ 23 ] Lithuanian , Latvian , Estonian , Finnish and Sámi languages . The Sámi were the last peoples to be converted in the 18th century.

[ 24 ] Regional cooperation [ edit ] The Russian White Sea–Baltic Canal , connecting eastern Baltic Europe to the Arctic The Hansa group in the European Union comprises most of the northern European states, plus the Netherlands.

The melting of the Arctic is likely to create new possibilities and issues involving collaboration in the region.

[ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Archaeology of Northern Europe Arctic Circle Arctic Council Baltic Assembly Baltic Council of Ministers Baltoscandia British–Irish Council British–Irish Parliamentary Assembly Celtic nations Central Europe Common Travel Area Council of the Baltic Sea States Crown Dependencies European Free Trade Association Euroregion Baltic Joint Expeditionary Force List of Intangible Cultural Heritage elements in Northern Europe List of World Heritage Sites in Northern Europe New Hanseatic League Nordic-Baltic Eight Nordic Battlegroup Nordic Council Nordic cross flag Nordic Estonia Nordic model Nordic Passport Union North Sea Region Northern Dimension Northern European Gymnastics Championships Northern Future Forum Northwestern Europe OTSEM Roadex Project Southern Europe Synchronous grid of Northern Europe Vifanord References [ edit ] ^ a b "UNSD — Methodology" .

unstats.un.org .

Archived from the original on 30 August 2017 . Retrieved 17 June 2019 .

^ Publications Office of the European Union.

"EU Vocabularies 7206 Europe" .

EuroVoc .

Archived from the original on 24 April 2019 . Retrieved 24 April 2019 .

^ CIA.

"The World Factbook" .

Archived from the original on 4 January 2021 . Retrieved 26 January 2021 .

^ Brummitt, R. K. (2001).

World Geographical Scheme for Recording Plant Distributions (PDF) (2nd ed.). International Working Group on Taxonomic Databases For Plant Sciences (TDWG). Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 January 2016 . Retrieved 27 July 2021 .

^ "The Faroese Language" .

faroeislands.fo .

Archived from the original on 16 August 2021 . Retrieved 27 June 2021 .

^ "Act [No 61/2011] on the status of the Icelandic language and Icelandic sign language" (PDF) .

Ministry of Education, Science and Culture . p. 1.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 October 2017 . Retrieved 15 November 2013 .

Article 1; National language – official language; Icelandic is the national language of the Icelandic people and the official language in Iceland. Article 2; The Icelandic language — The national language is the common language of the Icelandic general public. Public authorities shall ensure that its use is possible in all areas of Icelandic society. All persons residing in Iceland must be given the opportunity to learn Icelandic and to use it for their general participation in Icelandic society, as further provided in leges speciales.

^ Lewis, M. Paul, ed. (2009).

Ethnologue: Languages of the World (16th ed.). Dallas, Texas: SIL International.

ISBN 978-1-55671-216-6 .

Archived from the original on 27 December 2007 . Retrieved 27 August 2012 .

^ Vikør, Lars .

" Fakta om norsk språk " . Archived from the original on 3 February 2014 . Retrieved 9 February 2014 .

^ Parkvall, Mikael (2009).

"Sveriges språk. Vem talar vad och var?" (PDF) .

RAPPLING 1. Rapporter Från Institutionen för Lingvistik Vid Stockholms Universitet : 24.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 September 2014 . Retrieved 1 January 2023 .

^ "Facts about Jersey" .

Government of Jersey . 30 November 2015.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2019 . Retrieved 4 January 2023 .

^ "Languages – Languages" .

BBC .

Archived from the original on 2 November 2020 . Retrieved 1 January 2023 .

^ Ranelagh, John (1994).

A Short History of Ireland . Cambridge University Press. p. 118.

ISBN 978-0-521-46944-9 .

Archived from the original on 18 September 2023 . Retrieved 1 January 2023 .

^ a b c "Atlas of the World's Languages in Danger" .

unesdoc.unesco.org . pp.

39– 40, 164– 165, 182– 183.

Archived from the original on 20 September 2022 . Retrieved 31 December 2022 .

^ "Språk i Finland" [Language in Finland].

Institute for the Languages of Finland (in Swedish).

Archived from the original on 4 January 2023 . Retrieved 4 January 2023 .

^ "The Estonian Language" .

Estonica.org .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2020 . Retrieved 15 October 2022 .

^ Rodiklių duomenų bazė.

"Oficialiosios statistikos portalas" .

osp.stat.gov.lt (in Lithuanian).

Archived from the original on 4 January 2023 . Retrieved 4 January 2023 .

^ "Dažādu tautu valodu prasme" .

vvk.lv (in Latvian).

Archived from the original on 11 October 2017 . Retrieved 4 January 2023 .

^ "Endangered Languages Project – Jèrriais" .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2019 . Retrieved 10 September 2019 .

^ Sallabank, Julia (1 July 2013).

"Can majority support save an endangered language? A case study of language attitudes in Guernsey" .

Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development .

34 (4): 332– 347.

doi : 10.1080/01434632.2013.794808 .

ISSN 0143-4632 .

S2CID 144265439 .

Archived from the original on 18 September 2023 . Retrieved 4 January 2023 .

^ Tanner, Norman.

New Short History of the Catholic Church . p. 41.

^ "Celtic languages – Irish | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com .

Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 25 April 2023 .

^ Mackenzie, Donald W. (1990–92). "The Worthy Translator: How the Scottish Gaels got the Scriptures in their own Tongue".

Transactions of the Gaelic Society of Inverness .

57 : 168– 202.

^ Watkins, T. Arwyn (1993) "Welsh" in Ball, Martin J. with Fife, James (Eds) The Celtic Languages.

London/New York: Routledge: 289–348.

^ Kenneth Scott Latourette, A history of expansion of Christianity. Vol 2. The thousand years of uncertainty: AD 500–AD 1500 (1938) pp. 106–43.

^ Heininen, Lassi (2 October 2017).

"The Arctic, Baltic, and North-Atlantic 'cooperative regions' in 'Wider Northern Europe': similarities and differences" .

Journal of Baltic Studies .

48 (4): 435– 450.

doi : 10.1080/01629778.2017.1305180 .

ISSN 0162-9778 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Northern Europe at Wikimedia Commons v t e Earth 's primary regions and subregions Worlds Down Under New World Old World Three/Four Worlds First World Second World Third World Fourth World Hemispheres Eastern Land Hemisphere Northern Southern Water Hemisphere Western Landmasses Africa-Eurasia Eurasia Americas Antarctica Australia Zealandia submerged Tectonic plates Continents Africa North Maghreb Sub-Saharan Central East Horn Great Lakes Southern West Antarctica East Antarctica Antarctic Plateau Transantarctic Mountains West Antarctica Antarctic Peninsula Asia East Northeast Southeast Mainland Maritime Central Aral Sea Aralkum Desert Caspian Sea North Siberia Ural Russian Far East Northeast South Indian subcontinent Subregions West Arabian Peninsula Caucasus South Caucasus Levant Dead Sea Levantine corridor Levantine Sea Near East Other regions Himalayan Himalayan states Indian region Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Europe Eastern Balkans Caucasus North Caucasus South Caucasus Southern Russia European Russia Southeastern Northern Baltic British Isles Nordic Northwestern Scandinavia Scandinavian Peninsula Southern Mediterranean Middle East Italy Italian peninsula South-eastern Balkan Peninsula South-western Iberian Peninsula Western Atlantic Low Countries Northwestern Other regions Central Europe By language Celtic Germanic Romance Slavic Macaronesia North America Northern America Greenland Great Lakes Pacific Northwest United States Appalachia Bible Belt Eastern East Coast Northern Southeast Southwest U.S. Census regions Northeastern New England Mid-Atlantic Midwest South Western Mountain Pacific Canada Atlantic Canadian Prairies Central Eastern Northern Western Middle America Aridoamerica Greater Caribbean Caribbean West Indies Central Am.

Mesoamerica Northern Mexico Oceania Australasia Australia Mainland Australia New Guinea Tasmania Zealandia Melanesia Island Melanesia Micronesia Near Oceania Polynesia Remote Oceania South America Amazon Plain Amazon Basin Amazon Rainforest Andean States Brazilian Highlands Caribbean South America The Guianas Southern Cone Patagonia Geopolitical regions Global East Heartland North Northeast Northwest South Southeast Southwest West Asia–Pacific Far East Pacific Asia Sinosphere Greater China Indosphere Greater India Europe, the Middle East and Africa Mediterranean Greater Middle East Middle East and North Africa Middle East Arab world Mashriq Maghreb Greater Iran Iranian plateau Americas Anglo Dutch French Latin America and the Caribbean Latin Ibero Hispanic Portuguese Islands By continent Africa Americas North America Caribbean Central America South America Antarctica Asia Europe by area by population Oceania Australia New Zealand By ocean Arctic Atlantic Baltic Sea Black Sea Caribbean Sea Irish Sea Mediterranean Sea Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Ionian Sea Indian Persian Gulf Pacific East China Sea South China Sea Southern Oceans Antarctic/Southern Antarctic Convergence Arctic Atlantic Indian Pacific Great Barrier Reef Mariana Trench Challenger Deep Ring of Fire World Ocean Other waterbodies Lakes lists Rivers Seas Rim Arctic Atlantic Indo-Mediterranean Indian Ocean Mediterranean Pacific Polar Antarctic Arctic Continents of Earth / List of seas / Physical Earth v t e Europe articles History Chronology Bibliography of European history Prehistory Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages Early modernity World War I World War II Pax Europaea Crisis situations and unrest since 2000 COVID-19 pandemic Russian invasion of Ukraine By topic Military Sovereignty predecessor states Geography Areas and populations Countries by area European microstates Largest metropolitan areas Cities Climate Climate change Extreme points Geology Islands Lakes Mountains Regions Rivers Sovereign states and dependent territories by population Villages Politics Eurosphere International organisations Integration Law Post-Soviet Europe Transatlantic relations Intergovernmental Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) Council of Europe (CoE) Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO) Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) European Political Community (EPC) GUAM Organization Open Balkan North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) statistics Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation European Union Economy relations free trade agreements Education European Economic Area (EEA) European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) Eastern Partnership Euronest Parliamentary Assembly European Union Customs Union (EUCU) Eurozone Foreign relations Members enlargement Politics Schengen Area Visa policy Statistics Economy History Financial (and social) rankings Free trade areas Energy Telecommunications Transport Rail Road Intergovernmental Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) Eurasian Customs Union (EACU) Eurasian Economic Community (EAEC) European Free Trade Association (EFTA) Sovereign states by Average wage Budget revenues per capita GDP (nominal) per capita GDP (PPP) per capita GNI (nominal) per capita GNI (PPP) per capita HDI Internet users (%) Minimum wage Press Freedom Index Unemployment rate (%) Health expense per capita Military spending (%) Urban population (%) Electricity use per capita Society Ages of consent Etiquette Social (and financial) rankings Languages endangered Tattooing Universities Bologna Process Erasmus Culture Art painting sculpture Architecture Capital of Culture Cinema film festivals Classical music Cuisine Dance Folklore Literature Philosophy Religion Christianity Islam Judaism Sport Symbols ( Armorial , Flags ) Demographics Ageing Childhood population (%) Ethnic groups genetic history Immigration Life expectancy by region Retirement Outline Index Category Portal Maps Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Portals : Geography Europe NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐z8t5s
Cached time: 20250817230926
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.676 seconds
Real time usage: 0.818 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4054/1000000
Revision size: 23140/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 255413/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 21898/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 33/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 116647/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.408/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15140818/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  655.246      1 -total
 28.34%  185.693      1 Template:Reflist
 21.73%  142.376     16 Template:Navbox
 16.92%  110.898     14 Template:Cite_web
 15.67%  102.646      1 Template:Regions_of_the_world
 10.44%   68.420      1 Template:Lang
 10.15%   66.477      1 Template:Europe_topics_(small)
  9.80%   64.188      1 Template:Region_topics
  9.11%   59.722      1 Template:Short_description
  6.12%   40.103      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:159865:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817230926 and revision id 1298306725. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Northern_Europe&oldid=1298306725 " Category : Northern Europe Hidden categories: CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv) CS1 Lithuanian-language sources (lt) CS1 Latvian-language sources (lv) CS1: abbreviated year range Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2024 Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 18:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Northern Europe 118 languages Add topic

