Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Functions Toggle Functions subsection 1.1 Collecting and archiving 1.2 Research and education 1.3 Public programs and exhibits 1.4 Community outreach 2 History 3 Funding 4 Governance Toggle Governance subsection 4.1 Non-profit board structure 4.2 Government-affiliated 4.3 Hybrid models 5 Global comparison 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Historical society 9 languages Беларуская Deutsch Հայերեն 日本語 Norsk bokmål Simple English Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Organization that preserves items of historical interest The Washington State History Research Center, operated by the Washington State Historical Society A historical society is non-profit organization dedicated to collecting, preserving, interpreting, and promoting the history of a particular place, group of people, or topic. They play a crucial role in promoting historical awareness and understanding by providing a platform for research, education, and public engagement.

[ 1 ] Historical societies vary in specialization, with focuses ranging from specific geographical areas such as countries, states/provinces or cities/towns, ethnographic such as ethnic and genealogical , and topical such as transportation, event based, or military history.

Functions [ edit ] Collecting and archiving [ edit ] Historical societies acquire and maintain historical materials like documents, photographs, artifacts, and audio recordings. These collections serve as a vital resource for researchers, genealogists, and the general public.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Research and education [ edit ] Many historical societies have staff historians who conduct research on their collections and broader historical topics. They publish books, articles, and educational materials to share their findings with the public.

[ 2 ] Public programs and exhibits [ edit ] Historical societies organize lectures, workshops, tours, and exhibitions to engage the community and educate them about history. These programs can range from introductory talks for general audiences to specialized conferences for academic researchers.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Community outreach [ edit ] Historical societies often collaborate with local schools, libraries, and community centers to offer educational programs and promote historical literacy.

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] Rev. Jeremy Belknap The concept of a historical society itself has evolved over time. Early institutions have concentrated on material culture (like the Academy) while later ones embraced broader historical research methods.

The inception of historical societies can be traced back to Western Europe during the 16th and 17th centuries, where they were often founded by enthusiasts of antiquity. These societies experienced a significant surge in growth in the first half of the 19th century, coinciding with a renewed interest in history alongside the rise of bourgeois - nationalistic ideals, the strengthening of national identities, and advancements in scientific historical research methods. Throughout the 19th and 20th centuries, historical societies have played a pivotal role on a large scale, disseminating a wealth of historical source materials, producing their own publications, and organizing congresses.

[ 7 ] The title of the first formally established historical society in the United States goes to the Massachusetts Historical Society (MHS), founded in 1791. While there were earlier informal groups with similar aims, the MHS stands out for its official structure and dedication to preserving American history.

[ 8 ] The MHS owes its creation to Reverend Jeremy Belknap , a passionate antiquarian and minister. Concerned about the loss of historical materials, Belknap gathered a group of like-minded Bostonians, including scholars, politicians, and civic leaders. Together, they envisioned an organization dedicated to collecting, preserving, and studying the history of Massachusetts and, by extension, the broader American story.

[ 8 ] Historical societies evolved in the 19th century with more inclusive membership policies, transitioning in the Progressive Era to serve the public. Interest in local history surged in the 20th century, especially in preserving changing cities. The founding of the American Association for State and Local History in 1940 further emphasized this shift. Over time, historical societies diversified their focus to include marginalized groups, reflecting changes in the discipline of history and societal developments towards greater inclusivity.

[ 9 ] Funding [ edit ] External support and contributions have long been integral to the sustainability of historical societies. Donations, memberships, annual funds, corporate sponsorships, internships, volunteering, and utilizing historic spaces all play vital roles in the ongoing growth and preservation of these nonprofit organizations.

[ 10 ] Governance [ edit ] Historical societies in the United States diversity in their governance structures. This reflects their varied missions, sizes, and funding sources.

Non-profit board structure [ edit ] This is the most prevalent structure. A volunteer board of directors , composed of community leaders, history enthusiasts, and sometimes professional expertise, oversees the society's operations. The board sets strategic direction, hires an executive director , and approves budgets.

The benefits of this model provides diverse perspectives, fosters community engagement, and leverages volunteer expertise. Its challenges are that board members might require training on non-profit governance and historical best practices. Ensuring continuity of vision with board member turnover can be difficult.

[ 11 ] [ 2 ] Government-affiliated [ edit ] State Historical Societies: Some states have government-established historical societies that receive partial funding from the state legislature. These societies often have a board with a mix of appointed and elected members, balancing public accountability with expert guidance.

Municipal or County Historical Societies:  These societies might receive funding from local governments while maintaining a degree of autonomy. Their boards might include a mix of appointed officials and community representatives. The benefits of this model are access to government funding can support larger projects and professional staffing but require a balancing of public policy that mandates with the society's mission creating a potential for political influence on historical interpretation.

[ 11 ] Hybrid models [ edit ] Collaboration with Universities: Some historical societies engage in partnerships with universities, tapping into academic knowledge and potentially utilizing shared resources or personnel. Governance arrangements may include a combined board or advisory committees. Benefits from of a hybrid model can leverage the strengths of different institutions and fosters collaboration across cultural sectors but navigating the complexities of inter-institutional decision make for potential conflicts of interest.

[ 11 ] Factors Affecting Governance are the size and budget of an organization can impact the structure of its board, with larger societies with paid staff often requiring a more formalized approach compared to smaller volunteer-run groups. The sources of funding play a crucial role in shaping the composition and responsibilities of the governing body, especially for organizations reliant on government support. The mission and focus of a society also influence its governance, with boards of societies dedicated to specific historical themes often benefitting from members with relevant expertise in the field.

[ 11 ] [ 2 ] New York takes a unique approach to cultural agencies, viewing them not as nonprofit businesses but as educational organizations. These cultural agencies play a vital role in the educational system, operating under Education Law instead of Corporation Law and falling under the jurisdiction of the Board of Regents of the University of the State of New York .

[ 12 ] Global comparison [ edit ] The entrance of the building of the Historiographical Institute of the University of Tokyo.

American historical societies emphasize local and state history, often decentralized with strong volunteer bases. They hold extensive collections of documents and artifacts, focusing on oral histories to capture diverse community experiences. Despite funding and staffing challenges, their grassroots initiatives prioritize underrepresented stories.

[ 2 ] European historical societies, rooted in royal patronage, often feature centralized structures with a focus on academic research, public engagement, and significant collections spanning archaeology, classical studies, and colonial-era documents. Despite grappling with their colonial past, these societies benefit from established infrastructure and funding for extensive research and global collaborations.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Asian historical societies in countries like China, Japan, and India have diverse focuses, from specific dynasties to cultural traditions. With vast collections of ancient texts and artifacts, these societies bridge traditional knowledge systems with Western research methods, promoting cultural exchange and a deeper global understanding of Asia's rich history.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] List of historical societies References [ edit ] ^ "SAA Dictionary: historical society" .

dictionary.archivists.org . Retrieved 2024-04-18 .

^ a b c d e f "The Future of Local Historical Societies | Perspectives on History | AHA" .

www.historians.org . Retrieved 2024-04-18 .

^ "Donate to MNHS Collections | Minnesota Historical Society" .

www.mnhs.org . Retrieved 2024-04-18 .

^ Creigh, Dorothy Weyer (1991).

A Primer for Local Historical Societies (2nd ed.). American Association for State and Local History/Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.

ISBN 978-0942063127 .

^ "About the Field" .

National Council on Public History . Retrieved 2024-04-18 .

^ Author, AASLH Contributing (2017-03-21).

"Reimagining Historical Societies: A Community Collaboration" .

AASLH . Retrieved 2024-04-18 .

{{ cite web }} : |last= has generic name ( help ) ^ "Historical Societies | Article about Historical Societies by The Free Dictionary" . 2024-01-04. Archived from the original on 2024-01-04 . Retrieved 2024-04-18 .

^ a b "Massachusetts Historical Society: History of the MHS" . 2016-03-22. Archived from the original on 2016-03-22 . Retrieved 2024-04-18 .

^ Lawrence, Debra DeRuyver, Jennifer Evans, Sara.

"History of Historical Societies in the U.S." www.publichistory.org .

Archived from the original on 2004-02-13 . Retrieved 2016-03-27 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Allen, Nancy (2004).

Council on Library and Information Resources (PDF) (Report) . Retrieved 2024-04-17 .

^ a b c d Lehmann, Walter G. (2020).

Organization and Governance of State Historical Organizations (PDF) (Report) . Retrieved 2024-04-17 .

^ "New York State Museum - Chartering" . 2015-12-22. Archived from the original on 2015-12-22 . Retrieved 2024-04-18 .

^ Boehme, Franziska (2022).

"Normative Expectations and the Colonial Past: Apologies and Art Restitution to Former Colonies in France and Germany" .

Global Studies Quarterly .

doi : 10.1093/isagsq/ksac053 . Retrieved 2024-04-18 .

^ Sapiens (2020-05-07).

"Confronting the Colonial Legacies of Museum Collections" .

SAPIENS . Retrieved 2024-04-18 .

^ Myrvold, K. (2015).

"Recensioner" .

HumaNetten .

35 : 50 – via LnuOpen.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Historical societies .

American Historical Association Royal Historical Society The Historical Association Central European History Society v t e Historical societies of the U.S. states Northeast New England Connecticut Museum of Culture and History Maine Historical Society Massachusetts Historical Society New Hampshire Historical Society Rhode Island Historical Society Vermont Historical Society Mid-Atlantic Delaware Historical Society Historical Society of Washington, D.C.

Maryland Historical Society New Jersey Historical Society New York Historical Historical Society of Pennsylvania Midwest East North Central Illinois State Historical Society Indiana Historical Society Historical Society of Michigan Ohio History Connection Wisconsin Historical Society West North Central State Historical Society of Iowa Kansas Historical Society Minnesota Historical Society State Historical Society of Missouri Missouri Historical Society Nebraska State Historical Society State Historical Society of North Dakota South Dakota State Historical Society South South Atlantic Florida Historical Society Georgia Historical Society North Carolina State Historic Preservation Office South Carolina Historical Society Virginia Historical Society West Virginia Division of Culture and History East South Central Alabama Historical Commission Kentucky Historical Society Mississippi Historical Society Tennessee Historical Commission West South Central Arkansas Historical Association Louisiana Historical Society Oklahoma Historical Society Texas State Historical Association West Mountain Arizona Historical Society History Colorado Idaho State Historical Society Montana Historical Society Nevada Historical Society Historical Society of New Mexico Utah State Historical Society Wyoming State Historical Society Pacific Alaska Historical Society California Historical Society Hawaiian Historical Society Oregon Historical Society Washington State Historical Society v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Historical_society&oldid=1272047932 " Category : Historical societies Hidden categories: CS1 errors: generic name CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 January 2025, at 23:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Historical society 9 languages Add topic

