Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Fixed temperature heat detectors 2 Rate-of-rise heat detectors 3 Heat detector selection 4 Advantages and Limitations of Different Types of Heat Detectors Toggle Advantages and Limitations of Different Types of Heat Detectors subsection 4.1 Fixed Threshold Detector 4.2 Rate-of-Rise Detector 5 References 6 See also Toggle the table of contents Heat detector 7 languages Català Deutsch Español فارسی Magyar 日本語 Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of fire alarm A residential heat detector A heat detector is a fire alarm device designed to respond when the convected thermal energy of a fire increases the temperature of a heat sensitive element. The thermal mass and conductivity of the element regulate the rate flow of heat into the element. All heat detectors have this thermal lag . Heat detectors have two main classifications of operation, "rate-of-rise" and "fixed temperature". The heat detector is used to help in the reduction of property damage.

Fixed temperature heat detectors [ edit ] This is the most common type of heat detector. Fixed temperature detectors operate when the heat sensitive eutectic alloy reaches the eutectic point changing state from a solid to a liquid. Thermal lag delays the accumulation of heat at the sensitive element so that a fixed-temperature device will reach its operating temperature sometime after the surrounding air temperature exceeds that temperature. The most common fixed temperature point for electrically connected heat detectors is 58 °C (136 °F).

Rate-of-rise heat detectors [ edit ] Rate-of-Rise (ROR) heat detectors operate on a rapid rise in element temperature of 6.7 to 8.3°C (12.1 to 14.9°F) increase per minute, irrespective of the starting temperature. This type of heat detector can operate at a lower temperature fire condition than would be possible if the threshold were fixed. It has two heat-sensitive thermocouples or thermistors . One thermocouple monitors heat transferred by convection or radiation, while the other responds to ambient temperature. The detector responds when the first sensing element's temperature increases relative to the other.

Rate of rise detectors may not respond to low energy release rates of slowly developing fires. To detect slowly developing fires combination detectors add a fixed temperature element that will ultimately respond when the fixed temperature element reaches the design threshold.

Heat detector selection [ edit ] Heat detectors commonly have a label on them that reads 'Not a life safety device'. This is because heat detectors are designed to respond to elevated temperatures, which may occur too late to safely alert individuals in the event of a fast-spreading fire. In contrast, smoke detectors are sensitive to the presence of smoke particles in the air, providing earlier warning of fire in many cases. Therefore, smoke detectors are more suitable for bedrooms or in hallways outside of bedrooms where early warning is crucial for life safety.

However, heat detectors are useful for areas like the kitchen, utility rooms (e.g., laundry room), garage, or attic, where smoke detectors may not be practical. In these areas, activities like cooking or the presence of dust and other particles could cause a smoke detector to trigger false alarms. A heat detector will provide a warning of a fire in these specific areas without being affected by non-fire related activities or particles.

[ 1 ] This allows extra time to evacuate the building or to put out the fire, if possible.

Mechanical heat detectors are independent fire warning stations that—unlike smoke detectors—can be installed in any area of a home. Portability, ease of installation, and excellent performance and reliability make this a good choice for residential fire protection when combined with the required smoke detectors. Because the detectors are not interconnected, heat activation identifies the location of the fire, facilitating evacuation from the home.

[ 2 ] Advantages and Limitations of Different Types of Heat Detectors [ edit ] Each type of heat detector has its own set of advantages and limitations, making it important to select the appropriate device based on the specific requirements of the area being monitored.

Fixed Threshold Detector [ edit ] A Fixed Threshold Detector triggers an alarm when a specific temp threshold is reached or exceeded. This type of detector is generally less sensitive to rapid temperature fluctuations, making it more suitable for areas like large, industrial kitchens where ovens or other heat-producing equipment are frequently in use.

Example Use Case: If a Fixed Threshold Detector is placed above a large, closed oven, the detector is less likely to generate a nuisance alarm when the oven door is opened, releasing a transient heat surge. In this circumstance, the Fixed Threshold Detector would be the preferable choice.

Rate-of-Rise Detector [ edit ] A Rate-of-Rise Detector , on the other hand, is designed to respond to a rapid increase in temperature over a short period of time. This type of detector is more sensitive to sudden temperature changes, making it better suited for areas that contain highly combustible materials.

Example Use Case: If a room filled with highly combustible materials is protected by a Fixed Threshold Detector, a rapidly-spreading fire could exceed the alarm threshold before the detector is triggered due to a phenomenon known as thermal lag refers to the delay that can occur in temperature measurements, which could cause a delay in triggering the alarm system. In this case, the Rate-of-Rise Detector may be the preferred choice, as it would be more likely to detect rapid temperature increases and trigger an alarm in a timely manner.

References [ edit ] ^ The Official State of Nevada Website (9 October 2023).

"FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS" (PDF) .

^ "Aspirating smoke detector" (in German). 9 October 2023.

See also [ edit ] Aspirating smoke detector Automatic fire suppression Carbon monoxide detector Fire alarm system Fire sprinkler Flame detector Gaseous fire suppression Manual fire alarm activation Passive infrared sensor Smoke detector v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline v t e Fire protection Fundamental concepts Backdraft Boiling liquid expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE) Boilover Combustibility and flammability Conflagration Dangerous goods (HAZMAT) Deflagration Detonation Dust explosion Enthalpy of vaporization Explosive Fire classification Fire control Fire loading Fire point Fire triangle Flammability diagram Flammability limit Flammable liquid Flashover Flash point Friction loss Gas leak Heat transfer Jet fire K-factor (fire protection) Pool fire Pyrolysis Spontaneous combustion Structure fire Thermal radiation Water pressure Technology Active fire protection Automatic fire suppression Condensed aerosol fire suppression Detonation flame arrester External water spray system Fire bucket Fire prevention Fire protection Fire retardant Fire-retardant fabric Fire retardant gel Fire-safe polymers Fire safety Fire sprinkler system Fire suppression system Firefighting foam Flame arrester Flame retardant Flashback arrestor Fusible link Gaseous fire suppression Hypoxic air technology for fire prevention Inerting system Intumescent Passive fire protection Personal protective equipment (PPE) Relief valve Spark arrestor Tank blanketing Vehicle fire suppression system Building design Annulus (firestop) Area of refuge Booster pump Compartmentation Crash bar Electromagnetic door holder Electromagnetic lock Emergency exit Emergency light Exit sign Fire curtain Fire cut Fire damper Fire door Fire escape Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire pump Fire sprinkler Firestop Firestop pillow Firewall (construction) Grease duct Heat and smoke vent Packing (firestopping) Penetrant (mechanical, electrical, or structural) Penetration (firestop) Pressurisation ductwork Safety glass Smoke control Smoke damper Smoke exhaust ductwork Smokeproof enclosure Standpipe (firefighting) Fire alarm systems Aspirating smoke detector Carbon monoxide detector Circuit integrity Explosive gas leak detector Fire alarm call box Fire alarm control panel Fire alarm notification appliance Fire drill Flame detector Heat detector Manual fire alarm activation Smoke detector Professions, trades, and services Duct cleaning Fire insurance Fire protection engineering Fireproofing Fire-resistance rating Fire Safety Evaluation System (FSES) Fire test Kitchen exhaust cleaning Listing and approval use and compliance Sprinkler fitting Industry organizations Institution of Fire Engineers (IFE) National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Society of Fire Protection Engineers (SFPE) Underwriters Laboratories (UL) Standards CE marking EN 3 EN 54 EN 16034 Flame spread GHS hazard statements GHS precautionary statements Life Safety Code (NFPA 101) List of R-phrases List of S-phrases Safety data sheet UL 94 Awards Arthur B. Guise Medal Harry C. Bigglestone Award See also Template:Fire Template:Firefighting Template:HVAC Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Heat_detector&oldid=1232869365 " Categories : Active fire protection Safety equipment Fire detection and alarm Firefighting equipment Detectors Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 July 2024, at 01:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Heat detector 7 languages Add topic

