Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Félix Guattari 2 Næss's definition 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Ecosophy 20 languages العربية Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Македонски Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophy of ecological harmony or equilibrium as developed by Arne Næss or Félix Guattari This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Ecosophy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Green politics Core topics Climate change litigation Fossil fuels lobby Green party List of topics Politics of climate change Four pillars Ecological wisdom Social justice Grassroots democracy Nonviolence Perspectives Alter-globalization Bright green environmentalism Criticisms of globalization Deep ecology Degrowth Dirty hands Disinvestment Ecoauthoritarianism Eco-capitalism Ecocentrism Ecofascism Ecofeminism Eco-nationalism Eco-socialism Environmentalism Green anarchism Green conservatism Green left Green liberalism Green libertarianism Green Zionism Social ecology Queer ecology Intellectuals Abbey Albert Anderson Bari Best Beuys Berry Bookchin Brown (Lester) Brower Carson Dodds d'Eaubonne Gandhi George Hawken Jackson Khosla Klein Kovel LaDuke Latouche Linkola Löwy Maathai Mason Næss Negri Nussbaum Porritt Raworth Rendueles Salleh Sassen Schumacher Scruton Shiva Singer Snyder Sukhdev Thoreau Zerzan Politicians Bandt Bausch Benčić Bennett Betancourt Brélaz Brown (Bob) Camejo Cohn-Bendit Cuffe Emsis Fajardo Feinstein Fischer Frassoni Grodzka Habeck Halsema Harris Hourigan Joly Kelly Kogler Kretschmann Kuhn Lalonde Lipietz López Lucas Lunacek Martin Manning May Nader O'Gorman Roth Schmidt-Nielsen Silva Sirkis Stein Trittin Van der Bellen Vējonis Wall Organizations Asia Pacific Greens Federation European Green Party Federation of Green Parties of Africa Federation of the Green Parties of the Americas Federation of Young European Greens Global Greens Global Young Greens World Ecological Parties Related topics Carbon fee and dividend Carbon tax Circular economy Climate change mitigation Climate finance Climate justice Climate target Conservation movement Corporate political activism Eco-investing Ecological economics Ecological modernization Ecomodernism Eco-tariff Ecotax Eco-terrorism Environmental conflict effects of agriculture effects of aviation finance issues justice movement planning pricing reform racism technology Environmentalism opposition Environmental skepticism Stewardship in music Fossil fuel phase-out Green development economy growth grabbing greening imperialism industrial policy infrastructure job New Deal recovery retrofit state theory transport hierarchy vehicle washing Localism Low-carbon economy List of environmental incidents conflicts killings Political ecology Progressivism Renewable energy Sustainable design development energy engineering refurbishment transport War on coal Water conflict Environment portal Politics portal v t e Ecosophy or ecophilosophy (a portmanteau of ecological philosophy ) is a philosophy of ecological harmony or equilibrium. The term was coined by the French post-structuralist philosopher Félix Guattari and the Norwegian philosopher Arne Næss , father of deep ecology .

Félix Guattari [ edit ] Ecosophy also refers to a field of practice introduced by psychoanalyst , poststructuralist philosopher, and political activist Félix Guattari . In part Guattari's use of the term demarcates a necessity for the proponents of social liberation, whose struggles in the 20th century were dominated by the paradigm of social revolution, to embed their arguments within an ecological framework which understands the interconnections of social and environmental spheres.

Guattari holds that traditional environmentalist perspectives obscure the complexity of the relationship between humans and their natural environment through their maintenance of the dualistic separation of human (cultural) and nonhuman (natural) systems; he envisions ecosophy as a new field with a monistic and pluralistic approach to such study. Ecology in the Guattarian sense, then, is a study of complex phenomena, including human subjectivity, the environment, and social relations, all of which are intimately interconnected. Despite this emphasis on interconnection, throughout his individual writings and more famous collaborations with Gilles Deleuze , Guattari has resisted calls for holism, preferring to emphasize heterogeneity and difference, synthesizing assemblages and multiplicities in order to trace rhizomatic structures rather than creating unified and holistic structures.

Without modifications to the social and material environment, there can be no change in mentalities. Here, we are in the presence of a circle that leads me to postulate the necessity of founding an "ecosophy" that would link environmental ecology to social ecology and to mental ecology.

— Guattari 1992 Guattari's concept of the three interacting and interdependent ecologies of mind, society, and environment stems from the outline of the three ecologies presented in Steps to an Ecology of Mind , a collection of writings by cyberneticist Gregory Bateson .

Næss's definition [ edit ] Næss defined ecosophy in the following way: By an ecosophy I mean a philosophy of ecological harmony or equilibrium. A philosophy as a kind of sofia (or) wisdom, is openly normative, it contains both norms, rules, postulates, value priority announcements and hypotheses concerning the state of affairs in our universe. Wisdom is policy wisdom, prescription, not only scientific description and prediction. The details of an ecosophy will show many variations due to significant differences concerning not only the 'facts' of pollution, resources, population, etc. but also value priorities.

— A. Drengson and Y. Inoue, 1995, page 8 While a professor at the University of Oslo in 1972, Arne Næss, introduced the terms " deep ecology movement" and "ecosophy" into environmental literature.  Næss based his article on a talk he gave in Bucharest in 1972 at the Third World Future Research Conference. As Drengson notes in Ecophilosophy, Ecosophy and the Deep Ecology Movement: An Overview , "In his talk, Næss discussed the longer-range background of the ecology movement and its connection with respect for Nature and the inherent worth of other beings."  Næss's view of humans as an integral part of a "total-field image [ 1 ] " of Nature contrasts with the alternative construction of ecosophy outlined by Guattari.

The term ecological wisdom , synonymous with ecosophy, was introduced by Næss in 1973.  The concept has become one of the foundations of the deep ecology movement. All expressions of values by Green Parties list ecological wisdom as a key value—it was one of the original Four Pillars of the Green Party and is often considered the most basic value of these parties. It is also often associated with indigenous religion and cultural practices.

[ 2 ] In its political context, it is necessarily not as easily defined as ecological health or scientific ecology concepts.

See also [ edit ] Ecology Environmental philosophy Global Greens Charter Green syndicalism Silvilization Simple living Spiritual ecology Sustainable living Yin and yang Notes [ edit ] ^ Næss, Arne. (1972): Shallow and the Deep. Oslo: Inquiry.

^ Robert T.F. Downes (2024-07-09).

"Natural Dialectics: Māori & Sioux Ecosophy Encounters the Rule of Law" .

The Journal of International Relations, Peace Studies, and Development .

9 (1).

ISSN 2429-2133 .

References [ edit ] Drengson, A. and Y. Inoue, eds. (1995) The Deep Ecology Movement: An Introductory Anthology . Berkeley: North Atlantic Publishers.

Guattari, Félix: »Pour une refondation des pratiques sociales«. In: Le Monde Diplomatique (Oct. 1992): 26-7.

Guattari, Félix: »Remaking Social Practices«. In: Genosko, Gary (Hg.) (1996): The Guattari Reader. Oxford, Blackwell, S. 262-273.

Maybury-Lewis, David. (1992) "On the Importance of Being Tribal: Tribal Wisdom." Millennium: Tribal Wisdom and the Modern World. Binimun Productions Ltd.

Næss, Arne. (1973) The Shallow and the Deep Long-Range Ecology Movement: A Summary". Inquiry, 16:95-100 Drengson A. & B. Devall (2008) (Eds) The Ecology of Wisdom. Writings by Arne Naess . Berkeley: Counterpoint Levesque, Simon (2016) Two versions of ecosophy: Arne Næss, Félix Guattari, and their connection with semiotics.

Sign Systems Studies 44(4): 511-541.

http://dx.doi.org/10.12697/SSS.2016.44.4.03 External links [ edit ] Ecophilosophy, Ecosophy and the Deep Ecology Movement: An Overview by Alan Drengson Ecospherics.net. Accessed 2005-08-14.

The Trumpeter , A Journal of Ecosophy.

v t e Environmental humanities Art Crop art Environmental art Environmental sculpture Land art Landscape painting Photography conservation landscape nature wildlife Sculpture trail Site-specific art Sustainable art Culture Cultural ecology Cultural landscape Ecolinguistics Ecological anthropology Ecosemiotics Environmental anthropology Ethnoecology Traditional ecological knowledge Literature Ecocomposition Ecocriticism Ecopoetry Geocriticism Nature writing Outdoor literature Philosophy Aesthetics of nature Critical realism Deep ecology Ecofeminism Ecophenomenology Ecosophy Environmental ethics Environmental justice Environmental philosophy Predation problem Social ecology Religion Ecotheology Environmental theology Religion and environmentalism Spiritual ecology Stewardship Other Anthrozoology Ecomusicology Environmental communication Environmental education adult arts-based Environmental history Environmental interpretation Environmental journalism Environmental law Outdoor education Political representation of nature Psychogeography Thematic interpretation Related Animal studies Bioethics Biophilia hypothesis Do it yourself ( ethic ) Natural history ( museums ) Popular science Property theory ( common property ) Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Simple living Slow food Spirit of place Sustainability studies Applied Arts and Crafts movement Acoustic ecology Biomimicry Ecological design Ecomuseum Educational trail Environmental design Landscape architecture assessment planning Nature center New Urbanism Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable fashion Themed walk Environment portal Category Commons Journals Degrees Authority control databases National United States Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐g88lv
Cached time: 20250812015406
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.372 seconds
Real time usage: 0.504 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1093/1000000
Revision size: 6767/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 76920/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2245/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 9/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 30025/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.233/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5469093/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  402.990      1 -total
 24.22%   97.593      1 Template:Green_politics_sidebar
 23.89%   96.256      1 Template:Green_politics
 23.34%   94.058      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 21.48%   86.549      1 Template:Reflist
 18.91%   76.220      1 Template:Cite_journal
 15.44%   62.231      1 Template:Short_description
 14.18%   57.142      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 13.07%   52.675      1 Template:Ambox
 10.07%   40.598      1 Template:Environmental_humanities Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:306064:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812015406 and revision id 1286690045. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ecosophy&oldid=1286690045 " Categories : Ecology Postmodern theory Environmental philosophy Environmentalism Arne Næss Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2014 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 21 April 2025, at 12:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ecosophy 20 languages Add topic

