Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions 2 Terminology 3 Commutative von Neumann algebras 4 Projections Toggle Projections subsection 4.1 Comparison theory of projections 5 Factors Toggle Factors subsection 5.1 Type I factors 5.2 Type II factors 5.3 Type III factors 6 The predual 7 Weights, states, and traces 8 Modules over a factor 9 Amenable von Neumann algebras 10 Tensor products of von Neumann algebras 11 Bimodules and subfactors 12 Non-amenable factors 13 Examples 14 Applications 15 See also 16 References Toggle the table of contents Von Neumann algebra 15 languages Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Von Neumann algebras ) *-algebra of bounded operators on a Hilbert space "operator ring" redirects here; not to be confused with ring operator or operator assistance .

In mathematics , a von Neumann algebra or W*-algebra is a *-algebra of bounded operators on a Hilbert space that is closed in the weak operator topology and contains the identity operator . It is a special type of C*-algebra .

Von Neumann algebras were originally introduced by John von Neumann , motivated by his study of single operators , group representations , ergodic theory and quantum mechanics . His double commutant theorem shows that the analytic definition is equivalent to a purely algebraic definition as an algebra of symmetries.

Two basic examples of von Neumann algebras are as follows: The ring L ∞ ∞ ( R ) {\displaystyle L^{\infty }(\mathbb {R} )} of essentially bounded measurable functions on the real line is a commutative von Neumann algebra, whose elements act as multiplication operators by pointwise multiplication on the Hilbert space L 2 ( R ) {\displaystyle L^{2}(\mathbb {R} )} of square-integrable functions .

The algebra B ( H ) {\displaystyle {\mathcal {B}}({\mathcal {H}})} of all bounded operators on a Hilbert space H {\displaystyle {\mathcal {H}}} is a von Neumann algebra, non-commutative if the Hilbert space has dimension at least 2 {\displaystyle 2} .

Von Neumann algebras were first studied by von Neumann (1930) in 1929; he and Francis Murray developed the basic theory, under the original name of rings of operators , in a series of papers written in the 1930s and 1940s (F.J. Murray & J. von Neumann 1936 , 1937 , 1943 ; J. von Neumann 1938 , 1940 , 1943 , 1949 ), reprinted in the collected works of von Neumann (1961) .

Introductory accounts of von Neumann algebras are given in the online notes of Jones (2003) and Wassermann (1991) and the books by Dixmier (1981) , Schwartz (1967) , Blackadar (2005) and Sakai (1971) . The three volume work by Takesaki (1979) gives an encyclopedic account of the theory. The book by Connes (1994) discusses more advanced topics.

Definitions [ edit ] There are three common ways to define von Neumann algebras.

The first and most common way is to define them as weakly closed *-algebras of bounded operators (on a Hilbert space) containing the identity. In this definition the weak (operator) topology can be replaced by  many other common topologies including the strong , ultrastrong or ultraweak operator topologies. The *-algebras of bounded operators that are closed in the norm topology are C*-algebras , so in particular any von Neumann algebra is a C*-algebra.

The second definition is that a von Neumann algebra is a subalgebra of the bounded operators closed under involution (the *-operation) and equal to its double commutant , or equivalently the commutant of some subalgebra closed under *. The von Neumann double commutant theorem ( von Neumann 1930 ) says that the first two definitions are equivalent.

The first two definitions describe a von Neumann algebra concretely as a set of operators acting on some given Hilbert space.

Sakai (1971) showed that von Neumann algebras can also be defined abstractly as C*-algebras that have a predual ; in other words the von Neumann algebra, considered as a Banach space , is the dual of some other Banach space called the predual.  The predual of a von Neumann algebra is in fact unique up to isomorphism. Some authors use "von Neumann algebra" for the algebras together with a Hilbert space action, and "W*-algebra" for the abstract concept, so a von Neumann algebra is a W*-algebra together with a Hilbert space and a suitable faithful unital action on the Hilbert space. The concrete and abstract definitions of a von Neumann algebra are similar to the concrete and abstract definitions of a C*-algebra, which can be defined either as norm-closed *-algebras of operators on a Hilbert space, or as Banach *-algebras such that | | a a ∗ ∗ | | = | | a | | | | a ∗ ∗ | | {\displaystyle ||aa^{*}||=||a||\ ||a^{*}||} .

Terminology [ edit ] Some of the terminology in von Neumann algebra theory can be confusing, and the terms often have different meanings outside the subject.

A factor is a von Neumann algebra with trivial center, i.e. a center consisting only of scalar operators.

A finite von Neumann algebra is one which is the direct integral of finite factors (meaning the von Neumann algebra has a faithful normal tracial state τ τ : M → → C {\displaystyle \tau :M\rightarrow \mathbb {C} } [ 1 ] ).  Similarly, properly infinite von Neumann algebras are the direct integral of properly infinite factors.

A von Neumann algebra that acts on a separable Hilbert space is called separable .  Note that such algebras are rarely separable in the norm topology.

The von Neumann algebra generated by a set of bounded operators on a Hilbert space is the smallest von Neumann algebra containing all those operators.

The tensor product of two von Neumann algebras acting on two Hilbert spaces is defined to be the von Neumann algebra generated by their algebraic tensor product, considered as operators on the Hilbert space tensor product of the Hilbert spaces.

By forgetting about the topology on a von Neumann algebra, we can consider it a (unital) *-algebra , or just a ring. Von Neumann algebras are semihereditary : every finitely generated submodule of a projective module is itself projective. There have been several attempts to axiomatize the underlying rings of von Neumann algebras, including Baer *-rings and AW*-algebras . The *-algebra of affiliated operators of a finite von Neumann algebra is a von Neumann regular ring . (The von Neumann algebra itself is in general not von Neumann regular.) Commutative von Neumann algebras [ edit ] Main article: Abelian von Neumann algebra The relationship between commutative von Neumann algebras and measure spaces is analogous to that between commutative C*-algebras and locally compact Hausdorff spaces .  Every commutative von Neumann algebra is isomorphic to L ∞ ( X ) for some measure space ( X , μ) and conversely, for every σ-finite measure space X , the *-algebra L ∞ ( X ) is a von Neumann algebra.

Due to this analogy, the theory of von Neumann algebras has been called noncommutative measure theory, while the theory of C*-algebras is sometimes called noncommutative topology ( Connes 1994 ).

Projections [ edit ] Operators E in a von Neumann algebra for which E = EE = E* are called projections ; they are exactly the operators which give an orthogonal projection of H onto some closed subspace. A subspace of the Hilbert space H is said to belong to the von Neumann algebra M if it is the image of some projection in M . This establishes a 1:1 correspondence between projections of M and subspaces that belong to M . Informally these are the closed subspaces that can be described using elements of M , or that M "knows" about.

It can be shown that the closure of the image of any operator in M and the kernel of any operator in M belongs to M . Also, the closure of the image under an operator of M of any subspace belonging to M also belongs to M .  (These results are a consequence of the polar decomposition ).

Comparison theory of projections [ edit ] The basic theory of projections was worked out by Murray & von Neumann (1936) . Two subspaces belonging to M are called ( Murray–von Neumann ) equivalent if there is a partial isometry mapping the first isomorphically onto the other that is an element of the von Neumann algebra (informally, if M "knows" that the subspaces are isomorphic). This induces a natural equivalence relation on projections by defining E to be equivalent to F if the corresponding subspaces are equivalent, or in other words if there is a partial isometry of H that maps the image of E isometrically to the image of F and is an element of the von Neumann algebra. Another way of stating this is that E is equivalent to F if E=uu* and F=u*u for some partial isometry u in M .

The equivalence relation ~ thus defined is additive in the following sense: Suppose E 1 ~ F 1 and E 2 ~ F 2 . If E 1 ⊥ E 2 and F 1 ⊥ F 2 , then E 1 + E 2 ~ F 1 + F 2 . Additivity would not generally hold if one were to require unitary equivalence in the definition of ~, i.e. if we say E is equivalent to F if u*Eu = F for some unitary u . The Schröder–Bernstein theorems for operator algebras gives a sufficient condition for Murray-von Neumann equivalence.

The subspaces belonging to M are partially ordered by inclusion, and this induces a partial order ≤ of projections. There is also a natural partial order on the set of equivalence classes of projections, induced by the partial order ≤ of projections. If M is a factor, ≤ is a total order on equivalence classes of projections, described in the section on traces below.

A projection (or subspace belonging to M ) E is said to be a finite projection if there is no projection F < E (meaning F ≤ E and F ≠ E ) that is equivalent to E .  For example, all finite-dimensional projections (or subspaces) are finite (since isometries between Hilbert spaces leave the dimension fixed), but the identity operator on an infinite-dimensional Hilbert space is not finite in the von Neumann algebra of all bounded operators on it, since it is isometrically isomorphic to a proper subset of itself. However it is possible for infinite dimensional subspaces to be finite.

Orthogonal projections are noncommutative analogues of indicator functions in L ∞ ( R ).

L ∞ ( R ) is the ||·|| ∞ -closure of the subspace generated by the indicator functions. Similarly, a von Neumann algebra is generated by its projections; this is a consequence of the spectral theorem for self-adjoint operators .

The projections of a finite factor form a continuous geometry .

Factors [ edit ] A von Neumann algebra N whose center consists only of multiples of the identity operator is called a factor .  As von Neumann (1949) showed, every von Neumann algebra on a separable Hilbert space is isomorphic to a direct integral of factors.  This decomposition is essentially unique.  Thus, the problem of classifying isomorphism classes of von Neumann algebras on separable Hilbert spaces can be reduced to that of classifying isomorphism classes of factors.

Murray & von Neumann (1936) showed that every factor has one of 3 types as described below.  The type classification can be extended to von Neumann algebras that are not factors, and a von Neumann algebra is of type X if it can be decomposed as a direct integral of type X factors;  for example, every commutative von Neumann algebra has type I 1 . Every von Neumann algebra can be written uniquely as a sum of von Neumann algebras of types I, II, and III.

There are several other ways to divide factors into classes that are sometimes used: A factor is called discrete (or occasionally tame )  if it has type I, and continuous (or occasionally wild ) if it has type II or III.

A factor is called semifinite if it has type I or II, and purely infinite if it has type  III.

A factor is called finite if the projection 1 is finite and properly infinite otherwise. Factors of types I and II may be either finite or properly infinite, but factors of type III are always properly infinite.

Type I factors [ edit ] A factor is said to be of type I if there is a minimal projection E ≠ 0 , i.e. a projection E such that there is no other projection F with 0 < F < E .  Any factor of type I is isomorphic to the von Neumann algebra of all bounded operators on some Hilbert space;  since there is one Hilbert space for every cardinal number , isomorphism classes of factors of type I correspond exactly to the cardinal numbers.  Since many authors consider von Neumann algebras only on separable Hilbert spaces, it is customary to call the bounded operators on a Hilbert space of finite dimension n a factor of type I n , and the bounded operators on a separable infinite-dimensional Hilbert space, a factor of type I ∞ .

Type II factors [ edit ] A factor is said to be of type II if there are no minimal projections but there are non-zero finite projections . This implies that every projection E can be "halved" in the sense that there are two projections F and G that are Murray–von Neumann equivalent and satisfy E = F + G .  If the identity operator in a type II factor is finite, the factor is said to be of type II 1 ; otherwise, it is said to be of type II ∞ .  The best understood factors of type II are the hyperfinite type II 1 factor and the hyperfinite type II ∞ factor , found by Murray & von Neumann (1936) . These are the unique hyperfinite factors of types II 1 and  II ∞ ; there are an uncountable number of other  factors of these types that are the subject of intensive study.

Murray & von Neumann (1937) proved the fundamental result that a factor of type II 1 has a unique finite tracial state,  and the set of traces of projections is [0,1].

A factor of type II ∞ has a semifinite trace, unique up to rescaling, and the set of traces of projections is [0,∞]. The set of real numbers λ such that there is an automorphism rescaling the trace by a factor of λ is called the fundamental group of the type II ∞ factor.

The tensor product of a factor of type II 1 and an infinite type I factor has type II ∞ , and conversely any factor of  type II ∞ can be constructed like this. The fundamental group of a type II 1 factor is defined to be the fundamental group of its tensor product with the infinite (separable) factor of type I. For many years it was an open problem to find a type II factor whose fundamental group was not the group of positive reals , but Connes then showed that the von Neumann group algebra of a countable discrete group with Kazhdan's property (T) (the trivial representation is isolated in the dual space), such as SL(3, Z ),  has a countable fundamental group. Subsequently, Sorin Popa showed that the fundamental group can be trivial for certain groups, including the semidirect product of Z 2 by SL(2, Z ).

An example of a type II 1 factor is the von Neumann group algebra of a countable infinite discrete group such that every non-trivial conjugacy class is infinite.

McDuff (1969) found an uncountable family of such groups with non-isomorphic von Neumann group algebras, thus showing the existence of uncountably many different separable type II 1 factors.

Type III factors [ edit ] Lastly, type III factors are factors that do not contain any nonzero finite projections at all.  In their first paper Murray & von Neumann (1936) were unable to decide whether or not they existed; the first examples were later found by von Neumann (1940) . Since the identity operator is always infinite in those factors, they were sometimes called type III ∞ in the past, but recently that notation has been superseded by the notation III λ , where λ is a real number in the interval [0,1]. More precisely, if the Connes spectrum (of its modular group) is 1 then the factor is of type III 0 , if the Connes spectrum is all integral powers of λ for 0 < λ < 1, then the type is III λ , and if the Connes spectrum is all positive reals then the type is III 1 . (The Connes spectrum is a closed subgroup of the positive reals, so these are the only possibilities.) The only trace on type III factors takes value ∞ on all non-zero positive elements, and any two non-zero projections are equivalent. At one time type III factors were considered to be intractable objects, but Tomita–Takesaki theory has led to a good structure theory. In particular, any type III factor can be written in a canonical way as the crossed product of a type II ∞ factor and the real numbers.

The predual [ edit ] Any von Neumann algebra M has a predual M ∗ , which is the Banach space of all ultraweakly continuous linear functionals on M . As the name suggests, M is (as a Banach space) the dual of its predual. The predual is unique in the sense that any other Banach space whose dual is M is canonically isomorphic to M ∗ .

Sakai (1971) showed that the existence of a predual characterizes von Neumann algebras among C* algebras.

The definition of the predual given above seems to depend on the choice of Hilbert space that M acts on, as this determines the ultraweak topology. However the predual can also be defined without using the Hilbert space that M acts on, by defining it to be the space generated by  all positive normal linear functionals on M .  (Here "normal" means that it preserves suprema when applied to increasing nets of self adjoint operators; or equivalently to increasing sequences of projections.) The predual M ∗ is a closed subspace of the dual M* (which consists of all norm-continuous linear functionals on M ) but is generally smaller. The proof that M ∗ is (usually) not the same as M* is nonconstructive and uses the axiom of choice in an essential way; it is very hard to exhibit explicit elements of M* that are not in M ∗ . For example, exotic positive linear forms on the von Neumann algebra l ∞ ( Z ) are given by free ultrafilters ; they correspond to exotic *-homomorphisms into C and describe the Stone–Čech compactification of Z .

Examples: The predual of the von Neumann algebra L ∞ ( R ) of essentially bounded functions on R is the Banach space L 1 ( R ) of integrable functions. The dual of L ∞ ( R ) is strictly larger than L 1 ( R ) For example, a functional on L ∞ ( R ) that extends the Dirac measure δ 0 on the closed subspace of bounded continuous functions C 0 b ( R ) cannot be represented as a function in L 1 ( R ).

The predual of the von Neumann algebra B ( H ) of bounded operators on a Hilbert space H is the Banach space of all trace class operators with the trace norm || A ||= Tr(| A |). The Banach space of trace class operators is itself the dual of the C*-algebra of compact operators (which is not a von Neumann algebra).

Weights, states, and traces [ edit ] Further information: Noncommutative measure and integration Weights and their special cases states and traces are discussed in detail in ( Takesaki 1979 ).

A weight ω on a von Neumann algebra is a linear map from the set of positive elements (those of the form a*a ) to [0,∞].

A positive linear functional is a weight with ω(1) finite (or rather the extension of ω to the whole algebra by linearity).

A state is a weight with ω(1) = 1.

A trace is a weight with ω( aa* ) = ω( a*a ) for all a .

A tracial state is a trace with ω(1) = 1.

Any factor has a trace such that the trace of a non-zero projection is non-zero and the trace of a projection is infinite if and only if the projection is infinite. Such a trace is unique up to rescaling.  For factors that are separable or finite, two projections are equivalent if and only if they have the same trace. The type of a factor can be read off from the possible values of this trace over the projections of the factor, as follows: Type I n : 0, x , 2 x , ...., nx for some positive x (usually normalized to be 1/ n or 1).

Type I ∞ : 0, x , 2 x , ....,∞ for some positive x (usually normalized to be  1).

Type II 1 : [0, x ] for some positive x (usually normalized to be  1).

Type II ∞ : [0,∞].

Type III: {0,∞}.

If a von Neumann algebra acts on a Hilbert space containing a norm 1 vector v , then the functional a → ( av , v ) is  a normal state. This construction can be reversed to give an action on a Hilbert space from a normal state: this is the GNS construction for normal states.

Modules over a factor [ edit ] Given an abstract separable factor, one can ask for a classification of its modules, meaning the separable Hilbert spaces that it acts on. The answer is given as follows: every such module H can be given an M -dimension dim M ( H ) (not its dimension as a complex vector space) such that modules are isomorphic if and only if they have the same M -dimension. The M -dimension is additive, and a module is isomorphic to a subspace of another module if and only if it has smaller or equal M -dimension.

A module is called standard if it has a cyclic separating vector. Each factor has a standard representation, which is unique up to isomorphism. The standard representation has an antilinear involution J such that JMJ = M ′ . For finite factors the standard module is given by the GNS construction applied to the unique normal tracial state and the M -dimension is normalized so that the standard module has M -dimension 1, while  for infinite factors the standard module is the module with M -dimension equal to ∞.

The possible M -dimensions of modules are given as follows: Type I n ( n finite): The M -dimension can be any of 0/ n , 1/ n , 2/ n , 3/ n , ..., ∞. The standard module has M -dimension 1 (and complex dimension n 2 .) Type I ∞ The M -dimension  can be any of 0, 1, 2, 3, ..., ∞. The standard representation of B ( H ) is H ⊗ H ; its M -dimension is ∞.

Type II 1 : The M -dimension can be anything in [0, ∞]. It is normalized so that the standard module has M -dimension 1. The M -dimension is also called the coupling constant of the module H .

Type II ∞ : The M -dimension can be anything in [0, ∞]. There is in general no canonical way to normalize it; the factor may have outer automorphisms multiplying the M -dimension by constants. The standard representation is the one with M -dimension ∞.

Type III: The M -dimension can be 0 or ∞. Any two non-zero modules are isomorphic, and all non-zero modules are standard.

Amenable von Neumann algebras [ edit ] Connes (1976) and others proved that the following conditions on a von Neumann algebra M on a separable Hilbert space H are all equivalent : M is hyperfinite or AFD or approximately finite dimensional or approximately finite : this means the algebra contains an ascending sequence of finite dimensional subalgebras with dense union. (Warning: some authors use "hyperfinite" to mean "AFD and finite".) M is amenable : this means that the derivations of M with values in a normal dual Banach bimodule are all inner.

[ 2 ] M has Schwartz's property P : for any bounded operator T on H the weak operator closed convex hull of the elements uTu* contains an element commuting with M .

M is semidiscrete : this means the identity map from M to M is a weak pointwise limit of completely positive maps of finite rank.

M has property E or the Hakeda–Tomiyama extension property : this means that there is a projection of norm 1 from bounded operators on H to M '.

M is injective : any completely positive linear map from any self adjoint closed subspace containing 1 of any unital C*-algebra A to M can be extended to a completely positive map from A to M .

There is no generally accepted term for the class of algebras above; Connes has suggested that amenable should be the standard term.

The amenable factors have been classified: there is a unique one of each of the types I n , I ∞ , II 1 , II ∞ , III λ , for 0 < λ ≤ 1, and the ones of type III 0 correspond to certain ergodic flows. (For type III 0 calling this a classification is a little misleading, as it is known that there is no easy way to classify the corresponding ergodic flows.) The ones of type I and II 1 were classified by Murray & von Neumann (1943) , and the remaining ones were classified by Connes (1976) , except for the type III 1 case which was completed by Haagerup.

All amenable factors can be constructed using the group-measure space construction of Murray and von Neumann for a single ergodic transformation. In fact they are precisely the factors arising as crossed products by free ergodic actions of Z or Z/nZ on abelian von Neumann algebras L ∞ ( X ). Type I factors occur when the measure space X is atomic and the action transitive. When X is diffuse or non-atomic , it is equivalent to [0,1] as a measure space . Type II factors occur when X admits an equivalent finite (II 1 ) or infinite (II ∞ ) measure, invariant under an action of Z . Type III factors occur in the remaining cases where there is no invariant measure, but only an invariant measure class : these factors are called Krieger factors .

Tensor products of von Neumann algebras [ edit ] The Hilbert space tensor product of two Hilbert spaces is the completion of their algebraic tensor product. One can define a tensor product of von Neumann algebras (a completion of the algebraic tensor product of the algebras considered as rings), which is again a von Neumann algebra, and act on the tensor product of the corresponding Hilbert spaces.  The tensor product of two finite algebras is finite, and the tensor product of an infinite algebra and a non-zero algebra is infinite. The type of the tensor product of two von Neumann algebras  (I, II, or III) is the maximum of their types. The commutation theorem for tensor products states that ( M ⊗ ⊗ N ) ′ ′ = M ′ ′ ⊗ ⊗ N ′ ′ , {\displaystyle (M\otimes N)^{\prime }=M^{\prime }\otimes N^{\prime },} where M ′ denotes the commutant of M .

The tensor product of an infinite number of von Neumann algebras, if done naively, is usually a ridiculously large non-separable algebra. Instead von Neumann (1938) showed that  one should choose a state on each of the von Neumann algebras, use this to define a state on the algebraic tensor product, which can be used to produce a Hilbert space and a (reasonably small) von Neumann algebra.

Araki & Woods (1968) studied the case where all the factors are finite matrix algebras; these factors are called Araki–Woods factors or ITPFI factors (ITPFI stands for "infinite tensor product of finite type I factors").  The type of the infinite tensor product can vary dramatically as the states are changed; for example, the infinite tensor product of an infinite number of type I 2 factors can have any type depending on the choice of states. In particular Powers (1967) found an uncountable family of non-isomorphic hyperfinite type III λ factors for 0 < λ < 1, called Powers factors , by taking an infinite tensor product of type I 2 factors, each with the state given by: x ↦ ↦ T r ( 1 λ λ + 1 0 0 λ λ λ λ + 1 ) x .

{\displaystyle x\mapsto {\rm {Tr}}{\begin{pmatrix}{1 \over \lambda +1}&0\\0&{\lambda  \over \lambda +1}\\\end{pmatrix}}x.} All hyperfinite von Neumann algebras not of type III 0 are isomorphic to Araki–Woods factors, but there are uncountably many of type III 0 that are not.

Bimodules and subfactors [ edit ] A bimodule (or correspondence) is a Hilbert space H with module actions of two commuting von Neumann algebras. Bimodules have a much richer structure than that of modules. Any bimodule over two factors always gives a subfactor since one of the factors is always contained in the commutant of the other. There is also a subtle relative tensor product operation due to Connes on bimodules. The theory of subfactors, initiated by Vaughan Jones , reconciles these two seemingly different points of view.

Bimodules are also important for the von Neumann group algebra M of a discrete group Γ. Indeed, if V is any unitary representation of Γ, then, regarding Γ as the diagonal subgroup of Γ × Γ, the corresponding induced representation on l 2 (Γ, V ) is naturally a bimodule for two commuting copies of M . Important representation theoretic properties of Γ can be formulated entirely in terms of bimodules and therefore make sense for the von Neumann algebra itself. For example, Connes and Jones gave a definition of an analogue of Kazhdan's property (T) for von Neumann algebras in this way.

Non-amenable factors [ edit ] Von Neumann algebras of type I are always amenable, but for the other types there are an uncountable number of different non-amenable factors, which seem very hard to classify, or even distinguish from each other. Nevertheless, Voiculescu has shown that the class of non-amenable factors coming from the group-measure space construction is disjoint from the class coming from group von Neumann algebras of free groups. Later Narutaka Ozawa proved that group von Neumann algebras of hyperbolic groups yield prime type II 1 factors, i.e. ones that cannot be factored as tensor products of type II 1 factors, a result first proved by Leeming Ge for free group factors using Voiculescu's free entropy . Popa's work on fundamental groups of non-amenable factors represents another significant advance. The theory of factors "beyond the hyperfinite" is rapidly expanding at present, with many new and surprising results; it has close links with rigidity phenomena in geometric group theory and ergodic theory .

Examples [ edit ] The essentially bounded functions on a σ-finite measure space form a commutative (type I 1 ) von Neumann algebra acting on the L 2 functions. For certain non-σ-finite measure spaces, usually considered pathological , L ∞ ( X ) is not a von Neumann algebra;  for example, the σ-algebra of measurable sets might be the countable-cocountable algebra on an uncountable set. A fundamental approximation theorem can be represented by the Kaplansky density theorem .

The bounded operators on any Hilbert space form a von Neumann algebra, indeed a factor, of type I.

If we have any unitary representation of a group G on a Hilbert space H then the bounded operators commuting with G form a von Neumann algebra G ′ , whose projections correspond exactly to the closed subspaces of H invariant under G . Equivalent subrepresentations correspond to equivalent projections in G ′ . The double commutant G ′ ′ of G is also a von Neumann algebra.

The von Neumann group algebra of a discrete group G is the algebra of all bounded operators on H = l 2 ( G ) commuting with the action of G on H through right multiplication.  One can show that this is the von Neumann algebra generated by the operators corresponding to multiplication from the left with an element g ∈ G . It is a factor (of type II 1 ) if every non-trivial conjugacy class of G is infinite (for example, a non-abelian free group), and is the hyperfinite factor of type II 1 if in addition G is a union of finite subgroups (for example, the group of all permutations of the integers fixing all but a finite number of elements).

The tensor product of two von Neumann algebras, or of a countable number with states, is a von Neumann algebra as described in the section above.

The crossed product of a von Neumann algebra by a discrete (or more generally locally compact) group can be defined, and is a von Neumann algebra. Special cases are the group-measure space construction of Murray and von Neumann and Krieger factors .

The von Neumann algebras of a measurable equivalence relation and a measurable groupoid can be defined. These examples generalise von Neumann group algebras and the group-measure space construction.

Applications [ edit ] Von Neumann algebras have found applications in diverse areas of mathematics like knot theory , statistical mechanics , quantum field theory , local quantum physics , free probability , noncommutative geometry , representation theory , differential geometry , and dynamical systems .

For instance, C*-algebra provides an alternative axiomatization to probability theory. In this case the method goes by the name of Gelfand–Naimark–Segal construction . This is analogous to the two approaches to measure and integration, where one has the choice to construct measures of sets first and define integrals later, or construct integrals first and define set measures as integrals of characteristic functions.

See also [ edit ] AW*-algebra Central carrier Tomita–Takesaki theory – Mathematical method in functional analysis References [ edit ] ^ An Introduction To II1 Factors ens-lyon.fr ^ Connes, A (May 1978). "On the cohomology of operator algebras".

Journal of Functional Analysis .

28 (2): 248– 253.

doi : 10.1016/0022-1236(78)90088-5 .

Araki, H.; Woods, E. J. (1968), "A classification of factors", Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci. Ser. A , 4 (1): 51– 130, doi : 10.2977/prims/1195195263 MR 0244773 Blackadar, B. (2005), Operator algebras , Springer, ISBN 3-540-28486-9 , corrected manuscript (PDF) , 2013 Connes, A. (1976), "Classification of Injective Factors", Annals of Mathematics , Second Series, 104 (1): 73– 115, doi : 10.2307/1971057 , JSTOR 1971057 Connes, A. (1994), Non-commutative geometry , Academic Press, ISBN 0-12-185860-X .

Dixmier, J. (1981), Von Neumann algebras , 凡異出版社, ISBN 0-444-86308-7 (A translation of Dixmier, J. (1957), Les algèbres d'opérateurs dans l'espace hilbertien: algèbres de von Neumann , Gauthier-Villars , the first book about von Neumann algebras.) Jones, V.F.R. (2003), von Neumann algebras (PDF) ; incomplete notes from a course.

Kostecki, R.P. (2013), W*-algebras and noncommutative integration , arXiv : 1307.4818 , Bibcode : 2013arXiv1307.4818P .

McDuff, Dusa (1969), "Uncountably many II 1 factors", Annals of Mathematics , Second Series, 90 (2): 372– 377, doi : 10.2307/1970730 , JSTOR 1970730 Murray, F. J. (2006), "The rings of operators papers", The legacy of John von Neumann (Hempstead, NY, 1988) , Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., vol. 50, Providence, RI.: Amer. Math. Soc., pp.

57– 60, ISBN 0-8218-4219-6 A historical account of the discovery of von Neumann algebras.

Murray, F.J.; von Neumann, J. (1936), "On rings of operators", Annals of Mathematics , Second Series, 37 (1): 116– 229, doi : 10.2307/1968693 , JSTOR 1968693 . This paper gives their basic properties and the division into types I, II, and III, and in particular finds factors not of type I.

Murray, F.J.; von Neumann, J. (1937), "On rings of operators II", Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.

, 41 (2), American Mathematical Society: 208– 248, doi : 10.2307/1989620 , JSTOR 1989620 . This is a continuation of the previous paper, that studies properties of the trace of a factor.

Murray, F.J.; von Neumann, J. (1943), "On rings of operators IV", Annals of Mathematics , Second Series, 44 (4): 716– 808, doi : 10.2307/1969107 , JSTOR 1969107 . This studies when factors are isomorphic, and in particular shows that all approximately finite factors of type II 1 are isomorphic.

Powers, Robert T.

(1967), "Representations of Uniformly Hyperfinite Algebras and Their Associated von Neumann Rings", Annals of Mathematics , Second Series, 86 (1): 138– 171, doi : 10.2307/1970364 , JSTOR 1970364 Sakai, S.

(1971), C*-algebras and W*-algebras , Springer, ISBN 3-540-63633-1 Schwartz, Jacob (1967), W-* Algebras , Gordon & Breach Publishing, ISBN 0-677-00670-5 Shtern, A.I. (2001) [1994], "von Neumann algebra" , Encyclopedia of Mathematics , EMS Press Takesaki, M. (1979), Theory of Operator Algebras I, II, III , Springer, ISBN 3-540-42248-X von Neumann, J. (1930), "Zur Algebra der Funktionaloperationen und Theorie der normalen Operatoren", Math. Ann.

, 102 (1): 370– 427, Bibcode : 1930MatAn.102..685E , doi : 10.1007/BF01782352 , S2CID 121141866 . The original paper on von Neumann algebras.

von Neumann, J. (1936), "On a Certain Topology for Rings of Operators", Annals of Mathematics , Second Series, 37 (1): 111– 115, doi : 10.2307/1968692 , JSTOR 1968692 . This defines the ultrastrong topology.

von Neumann, J. (1938), "On infinite direct products" , Compos. Math.

, 6 : 1– 77 . This discusses infinite tensor products of Hilbert spaces and the algebras acting on them.

von Neumann, J. (1940), "On rings of operators III", Annals of Mathematics , Second Series, 41 (1): 94– 161, doi : 10.2307/1968823 , JSTOR 1968823 . This shows the existence of factors of type III.

von Neumann, J. (1943), "On Some Algebraical Properties of Operator Rings", Annals of Mathematics , Second Series, 44 (4): 709– 715, doi : 10.2307/1969106 , JSTOR 1969106 . This shows that some apparently topological properties in von Neumann algebras can be defined purely algebraically.

von Neumann, J. (1949), "On Rings of Operators. Reduction Theory", Annals of Mathematics , Second Series, 50 (2): 401– 485, doi : 10.2307/1969463 , JSTOR 1969463 . This discusses how to write a von Neumann algebra as a sum or integral of factors.

von Neumann, John (1961), Taub, A.H. (ed.), Collected Works, Volume III: Rings of Operators , NY: Pergamon Press . Reprints von Neumann's papers on von Neumann algebras.

Wassermann, A. J.

(1991), Operators on Hilbert space v t e Spectral theory and * -algebras Basic concepts Involution/*-algebra Banach algebra B*-algebra C*-algebra Noncommutative topology Projection-valued measure Spectrum Spectrum of a C*-algebra Spectral radius Operator space Main results Gelfand–Mazur theorem Gelfand–Naimark theorem Gelfand representation Polar decomposition Singular value decomposition Spectral theorem Spectral theory of normal C*-algebras Special Elements/Operators Isospectral Normal operator Hermitian/Self-adjoint operator Unitary operator Unit Spectrum Krein–Rutman theorem Normal eigenvalue Spectrum of a C*-algebra Spectral radius Spectral asymmetry Spectral gap Decomposition Decomposition of a spectrum Continuous Point Residual Approximate point Compression Direct integral Discrete Spectral abscissa Spectral Theorem Borel functional calculus Min-max theorem Positive operator-valued measure Projection-valued measure Riesz projector Rigged Hilbert space Spectral theorem Spectral theory of compact operators Spectral theory of normal C*-algebras Special algebras Amenable Banach algebra With an Approximate identity Banach function algebra Disk algebra Nuclear C*-algebra Uniform algebra Von Neumann algebra Tomita–Takesaki theory Finite-Dimensional Alon–Boppana bound Bauer–Fike theorem Numerical range Schur–Horn theorem Generalizations Dirac spectrum Essential spectrum Pseudospectrum Structure space ( Shilov boundary ) Miscellaneous Abstract index group Banach algebra cohomology Cohen–Hewitt factorization theorem Extensions of symmetric operators Fredholm theory Limiting absorption principle Schröder–Bernstein theorems for operator algebras Sherman–Takeda theorem Unbounded operator Examples Wiener algebra Applications Almost Mathieu operator Corona theorem Hearing the shape of a drum ( Dirichlet eigenvalue ) Heat kernel Kuznetsov trace formula Lax pair Proto-value function Ramanujan graph Rayleigh–Faber–Krahn inequality Spectral geometry Spectral method Spectral theory of ordinary differential equations Sturm–Liouville theory Superstrong approximation Transfer operator Transform theory Weyl law Wiener–Khinchin theorem v t e Hilbert spaces Basic concepts Adjoint Inner product and L-semi-inner product Hilbert space and Prehilbert space Orthogonal complement Orthonormal basis Main results Bessel's inequality Cauchy–Schwarz inequality Riesz representation Other results Hilbert projection theorem Parseval's identity Polarization identity ( Parallelogram law ) Maps Compact operator on Hilbert space Densely defined Hermitian form Hilbert–Schmidt Normal Self-adjoint Sesquilinear form Trace class Unitary Examples C n ( K ) with K compact & n <∞ Segal–Bargmann F v t e Banach space topics Types of Banach spaces Asplund Banach list Banach lattice Grothendieck Hilbert Inner product space Polarization identity ( Polynomially ) Reflexive Riesz L-semi-inner product ( B Strictly Uniformly ) convex Uniformly smooth ( Injective Projective ) Tensor product ( of Hilbert spaces ) Banach spaces are: Barrelled Complete F-space Fréchet tame Locally convex Seminorms / Minkowski functionals Mackey Metrizable Normed norm Quasinormed Stereotype Function space Topologies Banach–Mazur compactum Dual Dual space Dual norm Operator Ultraweak Weak polar operator Strong polar operator Ultrastrong Uniform convergence Linear operators Adjoint Bilinear form operator sesquilinear ( Un ) Bounded Closed Compact on Hilbert spaces ( Dis ) Continuous Densely defined Fredholm kernel operator Hilbert–Schmidt Functionals positive Pseudo-monotone Normal Nuclear Self-adjoint Strictly singular Trace class Transpose Unitary Operator theory Banach algebras C*-algebras Operator space Spectrum C*-algebra radius Spectral theory of ODEs Spectral theorem Polar decomposition Singular value decomposition Theorems Anderson–Kadec Banach–Alaoglu Banach–Mazur Banach–Saks Banach–Schauder (open mapping) Banach–Steinhaus (Uniform boundedness) Bessel's inequality Cauchy–Schwarz inequality Closed graph Closed range Eberlein–Šmulian Freudenthal spectral Gelfand–Mazur Gelfand–Naimark Goldstine Hahn–Banach hyperplane separation Kakutani fixed-point Krein–Milman Lomonosov's invariant subspace Mackey–Arens Mazur's lemma M. Riesz extension Parseval's identity Riesz's lemma Riesz representation Robinson-Ursescu Schauder fixed-point Sobczyk's theorem Analysis Abstract Wiener space Banach manifold bundle Bochner space Convex series Differentiation in Fréchet spaces Derivatives Fréchet Gateaux functional holomorphic quasi Integrals Bochner Dunford Gelfand–Pettis regulated Paley–Wiener weak Functional calculus Borel continuous holomorphic Measures Lebesgue Projection-valued Vector Weakly / Strongly measurable function Types of sets Absolutely convex Absorbing Affine Balanced/Circled Bounded Convex Convex cone (subset) Convex series related ((cs, lcs)-closed, (cs, bcs)-complete, (lower) ideally convex, (H x ), and (Hw x )) Linear cone (subset) Radial Radially convex/Star-shaped Symmetric Zonotope Subsets / set operations Affine hull ( Relative ) Algebraic interior (core) Bounding points Convex hull Extreme point Interior Linear span Minkowski addition Polar ( Quasi ) Relative interior Examples Absolute continuity AC b a ( Σ Σ ) {\displaystyle ba(\Sigma )} c space Banach coordinate BK Besov B p , q s ( R ) {\displaystyle B_{p,q}^{s}(\mathbb {R} )} Birnbaum–Orlicz Bounded variation BV Bs space Continuous C(K) with K compact Hausdorff Hardy H p Hilbert H Morrey–Campanato L λ λ , p ( Ω Ω ) {\displaystyle L^{\lambda ,p}(\Omega )} ℓ p ℓ ℓ ∞ ∞ {\displaystyle \ell ^{\infty }} L p L ∞ ∞ {\displaystyle L^{\infty }} weighted Schwartz S ( R n ) {\displaystyle S\left(\mathbb {R} ^{n}\right)} Segal–Bargmann F Sequence space Sobolev W k,p Sobolev inequality Triebel–Lizorkin Wiener amalgam W ( X , L p ) {\displaystyle W(X,L^{p})} Applications Differential operator Finite element method Mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) Validated numerics v t e Functional analysis ( topics – glossary ) Spaces Banach Besov Fréchet Hilbert Hölder Nuclear Orlicz Schwartz Sobolev Topological vector Properties Barrelled Complete Dual ( Algebraic / Topological ) Locally convex Reflexive Separable Theorems Hahn–Banach Riesz representation Closed graph Uniform boundedness principle Kakutani fixed-point Krein–Milman Min–max Gelfand–Naimark Banach–Alaoglu Operators Adjoint Bounded Compact Hilbert–Schmidt Normal Nuclear Trace class Transpose Unbounded Unitary Algebras Banach algebra C*-algebra Spectrum of a C*-algebra Operator algebra Group algebra of a locally compact group Von Neumann algebra Open problems Invariant subspace problem Mahler's conjecture Applications Hardy space Spectral theory of ordinary differential equations Heat kernel Index theorem Calculus of variations Functional calculus Integral linear operator Jones polynomial Topological quantum field theory Noncommutative geometry Riemann hypothesis Distribution (or Generalized functions ) Advanced topics Approximation property Balanced set Choquet theory Weak topology Banach–Mazur distance Tomita–Takesaki theory Category Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐qjrxs
Cached time: 20250814220830
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.827 seconds
Real time usage: 1.033 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4390/1000000
Revision size: 42775/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 138601/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1674/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 107012/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.537/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15997814/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  798.267      1 -total
 22.40%  178.775     26 Template:Citation
 17.13%  136.752      5 Template:Navbox
 15.70%  125.327      2 Template:Annotated_link
 12.93%  103.199      2 Template:Reflist
 11.25%   89.791      1 Template:Spectral_theory
 11.15%   89.034      1 Template:Cite_journal
  8.46%   67.555      1 Template:Short_description
  7.26%   57.976     26 Template:Harvtxt
  4.90%   39.082      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:294185:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220830 and revision id 1284344905. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Von_Neumann_algebra&oldid=1284344905 " Categories : Operator theory Von Neumann algebras John von Neumann Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 April 2025, at 00:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Von Neumann algebra 15 languages Add topic

