Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology Toggle Terminology subsection 1.1 Acid rock 1.2 Etymology 2 Classification of felsic rocks 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Felsic 23 languages Afrikaans العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí भोजपुरी Català Español Euskara فارسی Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands Português Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi ไทย Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Igneous rock rich in silica and feldspar In geology , felsic is a modifier describing igneous rocks that are relatively rich in elements that form feldspar and quartz .

[ 1 ] It is contrasted with mafic rocks, which are richer in magnesium and iron . Felsic refers to silicate minerals , magma , and rocks which are enriched in the lighter elements such as silicon , oxygen , aluminium , sodium , and potassium . Molten felsic magma  and lava is more viscous than molten mafic magma and lava. Felsic magmas and lavas have lower temperatures of melting and solidification than mafic magmas and lavas.

Felsic rocks are usually light in color and have specific gravities less than 3. The most common felsic rock is granite . Common felsic minerals include quartz, muscovite , orthoclase , and the sodium-rich plagioclase feldspars ( albite -rich).

Terminology [ edit ] Acid rock [ edit ] In modern usage, the term acid rock , although sometimes used as a synonym, normally now refers specifically to a high-silica-content (greater than 63% SiO 2 by weight) volcanic rock , such as rhyolite .  Older, broader usage is now considered archaic.

[ citation needed ] That usage, with the contrasting term "basic rock" (MgO, FeO, mafic ), was based on an ancient concept, dating from the 19th century, that " silicic acid " (H 4 SiO 4 or Si(OH) 4 ) was the chief form of silicon occurring in siliceous rocks. Although this intuition makes sense from an acid-base perspective in aquatic chemistry considering water-rock interactions and silica dissolution, siliceous rocks are not formed by this protonated monomeric species, but by a tridimensional network of SiO 4 4– tetrahedra connected to each other. Once released in water and hydrolyzed, these silica entities can indeed form silicic acid in aqueous solution.

Etymology [ edit ] The term "felsic" is a derivation of the words " fel dspar" and " si lica".

[ 2 ] The similarity of the resulting term felsic to the German felsig , "rocky" (from Fels , "rock"), is accidental.

Feldspar is from the German Feldspat ,  a compound of the German Feld , meaning field, plus spat[h] , meaning mineral.

[ 3 ] Classification of felsic rocks [ edit ] A felsic volcanic lithic fragment , as seen in a petrographic microscope .  Scale box is in millimeters.

In order for a rock (rather than a mineral ) to be classified as felsic, it generally needs to contain more than 75% felsic minerals (namely quartz, orthoclase and plagioclase ). Rocks with greater than 90% felsic minerals can also be called leucocratic , [ 4 ] from the Greek words for white and dominance.

Felsite is a petrologic field term used to refer to very fine-grained or aphanitic , light-colored volcanic rocks which might be later reclassified after a more detailed microscopic or chemical analysis.

In some cases, felsic volcanic rocks may contain phenocrysts of mafic minerals, usually hornblende , pyroxene or a feldspar mineral, and may need to be named after their phenocryst mineral, such as 'hornblende-bearing felsite'.

The chemical name of a felsic rock is given according to the TAS classification of Le Maitre (1975). However, this only applies to volcanic rocks. If the rock is analyzed and found to be felsic but is metamorphic and has no definite volcanic protolith , it may be sufficient to simply call it a 'felsic schist'. There are examples known of highly sheared granites which can be mistaken for rhyolites.

For phaneritic felsic rocks, the QAPF diagram should be used, and a name given according to the granite nomenclature. Often the species of mafic minerals is included in the name, for instance, hornblende-bearing granite, pyroxene tonalite or augite megacrystic monzonite , because the term "granite" already assumes content with feldspar and quartz.

The rock texture thus determines the basic name of a felsic rock.

Close-up of granite from Yosemite National Park .

A specimen of rhyolite .

Rock texture Name of felsic rock Pegmatitic Granite pegmatite Coarse-grained ( phaneritic ) Granite Coarse-grained and porphyritic Porphyritic granite Fine-grained ( aphanitic ) Rhyolite Fine-grained and porphyritic Porphyritic rhyolite Pyroclastic Rhyolitic tuff or breccia Vesicular Pumice Amygdaloidal None Vitreous (Glassy) Obsidian or porcellanite See also [ edit ] QAPF diagram List of minerals List of rock types Bowen's reaction series Archean felsic volcanic rocks Notes [ edit ] ^ Marshak, Stephen, 2009, Essentials of Geology, W. W. Norton & Company, 3rd ed.

ISBN 978-0393196566 ^ "felsic, adj" .

Oxford English Dictionary . 2023.

doi : 10.1093/OED/1115329128 . Retrieved 14 June 2024 .

^ Harper, Douglas.

"feldspar" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved 2008-02-08 .

^ Aurora Geosciences Ltd.

"Technical report Mackenzie mountains iron-copper property, Northwest Territories, Canada" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-10-10.

References [ edit ] Le Maitre, L. E., ed. 2002.

Igneous Rocks: A Classification and Glossary of Terms 2nd edition, Cambridge v t e Common igneous rocks classified by silicon dioxide content Type Ultramafic <45% SiO 2 Mafic 45–52% SiO 2 Intermediate 52–63% SiO 2 Intermediate – felsic 63–69% SiO 2 Felsic >69% SiO 2 Volcanic rocks : Subvolcanic rocks : Plutonic rocks : Picrite basalt Peridotite Basalt Diabase (Dolerite) Gabbro Andesite Microdiorite Diorite Dacite Microgranodiorite Granodiorite Rhyolite Microgranite Granite Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Felsic&oldid=1259082828 " Categories : Igneous petrology Mineralogy concepts Petrology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from January 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2019 This page was last edited on 23 November 2024, at 07:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Felsic 23 languages Add topic

