Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Measures of statistical dispersion 2 Sources 3 A partial ordering of dispersion 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Statistical dispersion 38 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Íslenska Italiano Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina کوردی Sunda Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Statistical property quantifying how much a collection of data is spread out This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Statistical dispersion" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Example of samples from two populations with the same mean but different dispersion. The blue population is much more dispersed than the red population.

In statistics , dispersion (also called variability , scatter , or spread ) is the extent to which a distribution is stretched or squeezed.

[ 1 ] Common examples of measures of statistical dispersion are the variance , standard deviation , and interquartile range . For instance, when the variance of data in a set is large, the data is widely scattered. On the other hand, when the variance is small, the data in the set is clustered.

Dispersion is contrasted with location or central tendency , and together they are the most used properties of distributions.

Measures of statistical dispersion [ edit ] A measure of statistical dispersion is a nonnegative real number that is zero if all the data are the same and increases as the data become more diverse.

Most measures of dispersion have the same units as the quantity being measured. In other words, if the measurements are in metres or seconds, so is the measure of dispersion. Examples of dispersion measures include: Standard deviation Interquartile range (IQR) Range Mean absolute difference (also known as Gini mean absolute difference) Median absolute deviation (MAD) Average absolute deviation (or simply called average deviation) Distance standard deviation These are frequently used (together with scale factors ) as estimators of scale parameters , in which capacity they are called estimates of scale.

Robust measures of scale are those unaffected by a small number of outliers , and include the IQR and MAD.

All the above measures of statistical dispersion have the useful property that they are location-invariant and linear in scale . This means that if a random variable X {\displaystyle X} has a dispersion of S X {\displaystyle S_{X}} then a linear transformation Y = a X + b {\displaystyle Y=aX+b} for real a {\displaystyle a} and b {\displaystyle b} should have dispersion S Y = | a | S X {\displaystyle S_{Y}=|a|S_{X}} , where | a | {\displaystyle |a|} is the absolute value of a {\displaystyle a} , that is, ignores a preceding negative sign − − {\displaystyle -} .

Other measures of dispersion are dimensionless . In other words, they have no units even if the variable itself has units. These include: Coefficient of variation Quartile coefficient of dispersion Relative mean difference , equal to twice the Gini coefficient Entropy : While the entropy of a discrete variable is  location-invariant and scale-independent, and therefore not a measure of dispersion in the above sense, the entropy of a continuous variable is location invariant and additive in scale: If H ( z ) {\displaystyle H(z)} is the entropy of a continuous variable z {\displaystyle z} and z = a x + b {\displaystyle z=ax+b} , then H ( z ) = H ( x ) + log ⁡ ⁡ ( a ) {\displaystyle H(z)=H(x)+\log(a)} .

There are other measures of dispersion: Variance (the square of the standard deviation) – location-invariant but not linear in scale.

Variance-to-mean ratio – mostly used for count data when the term coefficient of dispersion is used and when this ratio is dimensionless , as count data are themselves dimensionless, not otherwise.

Some measures of dispersion have specialized purposes. The Allan variance can be used for applications where the noise disrupts convergence.

[ 2 ] The Hadamard variance can be used to counteract linear frequency drift sensitivity.

[ 3 ] For categorical variables , it is less common to measure dispersion by a single number; see qualitative variation . One measure that does so is the discrete entropy .

Sources [ edit ] In the physical sciences , such variability may result from random measurement errors: instrument measurements are often not perfectly precise, i.e., reproducible , and there is additional inter-rater variability in interpreting and reporting the measured results. One may assume that the quantity being measured is stable, and that the variation between measurements is due to observational error .  A system of a large number of particles is characterized by the mean values of a relatively few number of macroscopic quantities such as temperature, energy, and density. The standard deviation is an important measure in fluctuation theory, which explains many physical phenomena, including why the sky is blue.

[ 4 ] In the biological sciences , the quantity being measured is seldom unchanging and stable, and the variation observed might additionally be intrinsic to the phenomenon: It may be due to inter-individual variability , that is, distinct members of a population differing from each other. Also, it may be due to intra-individual variability , that is, one and the same subject differing in tests taken at different times or in other differing conditions. Such types of variability are also seen in the arena of manufactured products; even there, the meticulous scientist finds variation.

A partial ordering of dispersion [ edit ] A mean-preserving spread (MPS) is a change from one probability distribution A to another probability distribution B, where B is formed by spreading out one or more portions of A's probability density function while leaving the mean (the expected value) unchanged.

[ 5 ] The concept of a mean-preserving spread provides a partial ordering of probability distributions according to their dispersions: of two probability distributions, one may be ranked as having more dispersion than the other, or alternatively neither may be ranked as having more dispersion.

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dispersion (statistics) .

Average Circular dispersion Dispersion matrix Probability density function Qualitative variation Measurement uncertainty Precision (statistics) Robust measures of scale Summary statistics References [ edit ] ^ NIST/SEMATECH e-Handbook of Statistical Methods.

"1.3.6.4. Location and Scale Parameters" .

www.itl.nist.gov . U.S. Department of Commerce.

^ "Allan Variance -- Overview by David W. Allan" .

www.allanstime.com . Retrieved 2021-09-16 .

^ "Hadamard Variance" .

www.wriley.com . Retrieved 2021-09-16 .

^ McQuarrie, Donald A. (1976).

Statistical Mechanics . NY: Harper & Row.

ISBN 0-06-044366-9 .

^ Rothschild, Michael; Stiglitz, Joseph (1970). "Increasing risk I: A definition".

Journal of Economic Theory .

2 (3): 225– 243.

doi : 10.1016/0022-0531(70)90038-4 .

v t e Statistics Outline Index Descriptive statistics Continuous data Center Mean Arithmetic Arithmetic-Geometric Contraharmonic Cubic Generalized/power Geometric Harmonic Heronian Heinz Lehmer Median Mode Dispersion Average absolute deviation Coefficient of variation Interquartile range Percentile Range Standard deviation Variance Shape Central limit theorem Moments Kurtosis L-moments Skewness Count data Index of dispersion Summary tables Contingency table Frequency distribution Grouped data Dependence Partial correlation Pearson product-moment correlation Rank correlation Kendall's τ Spearman's ρ Scatter plot Graphics Bar chart Biplot Box plot Control chart Correlogram Fan chart Forest plot Histogram Pie chart Q–Q plot Radar chart Run chart Scatter plot Stem-and-leaf display Violin plot Data collection Study design Effect size Missing data Optimal design Population Replication Sample size determination Statistic Statistical power Survey methodology Sampling Cluster Stratified Opinion poll Questionnaire Standard error Controlled experiments Blocking Factorial experiment Interaction Random assignment Randomized controlled trial Randomized experiment Scientific control Adaptive designs Adaptive clinical trial Stochastic approximation Up-and-down designs Observational studies Cohort study Cross-sectional study Natural experiment Quasi-experiment Statistical inference Statistical theory Population Statistic Probability distribution Sampling distribution Order statistic Empirical distribution Density estimation Statistical model Model specification L p space Parameter location scale shape Parametric family Likelihood (monotone) Location–scale family Exponential family Completeness Sufficiency Statistical functional Bootstrap U V Optimal decision loss function Efficiency Statistical distance divergence Asymptotics Robustness Frequentist inference Point estimation Estimating equations Maximum likelihood Method of moments M-estimator Minimum distance Unbiased estimators Mean-unbiased minimum-variance Rao–Blackwellization Lehmann–Scheffé theorem Median unbiased Plug-in Interval estimation Confidence interval Pivot Likelihood interval Prediction interval Tolerance interval Resampling Bootstrap Jackknife Testing hypotheses 1- & 2-tails Power Uniformly most powerful test Permutation test Randomization test Multiple comparisons Parametric tests Likelihood-ratio Score/Lagrange multiplier Wald Specific tests Z -test (normal) Student's t -test F -test Goodness of fit Chi-squared G -test Kolmogorov–Smirnov Anderson–Darling Lilliefors Jarque–Bera Normality (Shapiro–Wilk) Likelihood-ratio test Model selection Cross validation AIC BIC Rank statistics Sign Sample median Signed rank (Wilcoxon) Hodges–Lehmann estimator Rank sum (Mann–Whitney) Nonparametric anova 1-way (Kruskal–Wallis) 2-way (Friedman) Ordered alternative (Jonckheere–Terpstra) Van der Waerden test Bayesian inference Bayesian probability prior posterior Credible interval Bayes factor Bayesian estimator Maximum posterior estimator Correlation Regression analysis Correlation Pearson product-moment Partial correlation Confounding variable Coefficient of determination Regression analysis Errors and residuals Regression validation Mixed effects models Simultaneous equations models Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) Linear regression Simple linear regression Ordinary least squares General linear model Bayesian regression Non-standard predictors Nonlinear regression Nonparametric Semiparametric Isotonic Robust Homoscedasticity and Heteroscedasticity Generalized linear model Exponential families Logistic (Bernoulli) / Binomial / Poisson regressions Partition of variance Analysis of variance (ANOVA, anova) Analysis of covariance Multivariate ANOVA Degrees of freedom Categorical / multivariate / time-series / survival analysis Categorical Cohen's kappa Contingency table Graphical model Log-linear model McNemar's test Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel statistics Multivariate Regression Manova Principal components Canonical correlation Discriminant analysis Cluster analysis Classification Structural equation model Factor analysis Multivariate distributions Elliptical distributions Normal Time-series General Decomposition Trend Stationarity Seasonal adjustment Exponential smoothing Cointegration Structural break Granger causality Specific tests Dickey–Fuller Johansen Q-statistic (Ljung–Box) Durbin–Watson Breusch–Godfrey Time domain Autocorrelation (ACF) partial (PACF) Cross-correlation (XCF) ARMA model ARIMA model (Box–Jenkins) Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) Vector autoregression (VAR) Frequency domain Spectral density estimation Fourier analysis Least-squares spectral analysis Wavelet Whittle likelihood Survival Survival function Kaplan–Meier estimator (product limit) Proportional hazards models Accelerated failure time (AFT) model First hitting time Hazard function Nelson–Aalen estimator Test Log-rank test Applications Biostatistics Bioinformatics Clinical trials / studies Epidemiology Medical statistics Engineering statistics Chemometrics Methods engineering Probabilistic design Process / quality control Reliability System identification Social statistics Actuarial science Census Crime statistics Demography Econometrics Jurimetrics National accounts Official statistics Population statistics Psychometrics Spatial statistics Cartography Environmental statistics Geographic information system Geostatistics Kriging Category Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Statistical_dispersion&oldid=1230657893 " Categories : Statistical deviation and dispersion Summary statistics Accuracy and precision Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2010 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 June 2024, at 23:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Statistical dispersion 38 languages Add topic

