Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Patches and mosaics 2 Conservation efforts 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Patch dynamics 2 languages فارسی Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ecology This article is about ecosystems. For the use of the term in physics, see Patch dynamics (physics) .

This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( January 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Patch dynamics is an ecological perspective that the structure, function, and dynamics of ecological systems can be understood through studying their interactive patches.  Patch dynamics, as a term, may also refer to the spatiotemporal changes within and among patches that make up a landscape.  Patch dynamics is ubiquitous in terrestrial and aquatic systems across organizational levels and spatial scales.  From a patch dynamics perspective, populations, communities, ecosystems, and landscapes may all be studied effectively as mosaics of patches that differ in size, shape, composition, history, and boundary characteristics.

The idea of patch dynamics dates back to the 1940s when plant ecologists studied the structure and dynamics of vegetation in terms of the interactive patches that it comprises.  A mathematical theory of patch dynamics was developed by Simon Levin and Robert Paine in the 1970s, originally to describe the pattern and dynamics of an intertidal community as a patch mosaic created and maintained by tidal disturbances.  Patch dynamics became a dominant theme in ecology between the late 1970s and the 1990s.

Patch dynamics is a conceptual approach to ecosystem and habitat analysis that emphasizes dynamics of heterogeneity within a system (i.e. that each area of an ecosystem is made up of a mosaic of small 'sub-ecosystems').

[ 1 ] Diverse patches of habitat created by natural disturbance regimes are seen as critical to the maintenance of this diversity (ecology) . A habitat patch is any discrete area with a definite shape, spatial and configuration used by a species for breeding or obtaining other resources.

Mosaics are the patterns within landscapes that are composed of smaller elements, such as individual forest stands, shrubland patches, highways, farms, or towns.

Patches and mosaics [ edit ] Historically, due to the short time scale of human observation, mosaic landscapes were perceived to be static patterns of human population mosaics.

[ 2 ] This focus centered on the idea that the status of a particular population , community , or ecosystem could be understood by studying a particular patch within a mosaic. However, this perception ignored the conditions that interact with, and connect patches. In 1979, Bormann and Likens coined the phrase shifting mosaic to describe the theory that landscapes change and fluctuate, and are in fact dynamic.

[ 3 ] This is related to the battle of cells that occurs in a Petri dish [ citation needed ] .

Patch dynamics refers to the concept that landscapes are dynamic.

[ 1 ] There are three states that a patch can exist in: potential , active , and degraded . Patches in the potential state are transformed into active patches through colonization of the patch by dispersing species arriving from other active or degrading patches. Patches are transformed from the active state to the degraded state when the patch is abandoned, and patches change from degraded to active through a process of recovery .

[ 4 ] Logging, fire, farming, and reforestation can all contribute to the process of colonization, and can effectively change the shape of the patch.

Patch dynamics also refers to changes in the structure, function, and composition of individual patches that can, for example, affect the rate of nutrient cycling [ citation needed ] .

Patches are also linked. Although patches may be separated in space, migration can occur from one patch to another. This migration maintains the population of some patches, and can be the mechanism by which some plant species spread. This implies that ecological systems within landscapes are open, rather than closed and isolated. (Pickett, 2006) Conservation efforts [ edit ] Recognizing the patch dynamics within a system is needed for conservation (ecology) efforts to succeed. Successful conservation includes understanding how a patch changes and predicting how they will be affected by external forces.

[ 5 ] These externalities include natural effects, such as land use , disturbance , restoration , and succession , and the effects of human activities. In a sense, conservation is the active maintenance of patch dynamics (Pickett, 2006). The analysis of patch dynamics could be used to predict changes in biodiversity of an ecosystem. When patches of species can be tracked, it has been shown that fluctuations on the biggest patch (the most dominant species) can be used as an early warning of a biodiversity collapse.

[ 6 ] That means that if external conditions, like climate change and habitat fragmentation , change the internal dynamics of patches, a sharp reduction in biodiversity can be detected before it is produced.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Conservation biology Edge effect Forest dynamics Habitat conservation Habitat corridor Habitat fragmentation Island biogeography Landscape ecology Spatial ecology References [ edit ] ^ a b Pickett, Steward T.A.; White, P.S. (1985).

The Ecology of Natural Disturbance and Patch Dynamics . Academic Press.

ISBN 0123960215 .

^ Bogin, Barry (1999).

Patterns of human growth (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521564380 .

^ Bormann, F. Herbert; Likens, Gene E. (1979).

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem .

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4612-6232-9 .

ISBN 978-0-387-94344-2 .

^ Wright, Justin P.; Gurney, W.S.C.; C.G., Jones (2004).

"Patch dynamics in a landscape modified by ecosystem engineers" (PDF) .

OIKOS .

105 (2): 336– 348.

doi : 10.1111/j.0030-1299.2004.12654.x .

ISSN 0030-1299 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-06-26.

^ Furness, Euan N.; Garwood, Russell J.; Mannion, Philip D.; Sutton, Mark D. (2021).

"Evolutionary simulations clarify and reconcile biodiversity-disturbance models" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

288 (1949).

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2021.0240 .

ISSN 0962-8452 .

PMC 8059584 .

PMID 33878917 .

^ a b Saravia, Leonardo A.; Momo, Fernando R. (2017-07-01).

"Biodiversity collapse and early warning indicators in a spatial phase transition between neutral and niche communities" .

Oikos .

127 : 111– 124.

doi : 10.1111/oik.04256 .

ISSN 1600-0706 .

^ Corrado, Raffaele (2014). "Early warning signals of desertification transitions in semiarid ecosystems".

Physical Review E .

90 (6): 062705.

Bibcode : 2014PhRvE..90f2705C .

doi : 10.1103/physreve.90.062705 .

PMID 25615127 .

Further reading [ edit ] Forman, R.T.T. 1995. Land Mosaics: The Ecology of Landscapes and Regions. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Groom, Martha J., Meffe, Gary K., Carroll, Ronald. 2006. Principles of Conservation Biology, Third Edition. Mosaics and Patch Dynamics by Steward T.A. Pickett Levin, S. A., and R. T. Paine. 1974. Disturbance, patch formation and community structure. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (USA) 71:2744-2747.

Levin, S. A., T. M. Powell, and J. H. Steele, editors. 1993. Patch Dynamics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.

Wu, J. G., and O. L. Loucks. 1995. From balance of nature to hierarchical patch dynamics: A paradigm shift in ecology. Quarterly Review of Biology 70:439-466.

Patch Dynamics [1] v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Trophic components General Abiotic component Abiotic stress Behaviour Biogeochemical cycle Biomass Biotic component Biotic stress Carrying capacity Competition Ecosystem Ecosystem ecology Ecosystem model Green world hypothesis Keystone species List of feeding behaviours Metabolic theory of ecology Productivity Resource Restoration Producers Autotrophs Chemosynthesis Chemotrophs Foundation species Kinetotrophs Mixotrophs Myco-heterotrophy Mycotroph Organotrophs Photoheterotrophs Photosynthesis Photosynthetic efficiency Phototrophs Primary nutritional groups Primary production Consumers Apex predator Bacterivore Carnivores Chemoorganotroph Foraging Generalist and specialist species Intraguild predation Herbivores Heterotroph Heterotrophic nutrition Insectivore Mesopredators Mesopredator release hypothesis Omnivores Optimal foraging theory Planktivore Predation Prey switching Decomposers Chemoorganoheterotrophy Decomposition Detritivores Detritus Microorganisms Archaea Bacteriophage Lithoautotroph Lithotrophy Marine Microbial cooperation Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial intelligence Microbial loop Microbial mat Microbial metabolism Phage ecology Food webs Biomagnification Ecological efficiency Ecological pyramid Energy flow Food chain Trophic level Example webs Lakes Rivers Soil Tritrophic interactions in plant defense Marine food webs cold seeps hydrothermal vents intertidal kelp forests North Pacific Gyre San Francisco Estuary tide pool Processes Ascendency Bioaccumulation Cascade effect Climax community Competitive exclusion principle Consumer–resource interactions Copiotrophs Dominance Ecological network Ecological succession Energy quality Energy systems language f-ratio Feed conversion ratio Feeding frenzy Mesotrophic soil Nutrient cycle Oligotroph Paradox of the plankton Trophic cascade Trophic mutualism Trophic state index Defense, counter Animal coloration Anti-predator adaptations Camouflage Deimatic behaviour Herbivore adaptations to plant defense Mimicry Plant defense against herbivory Predator avoidance in schooling fish v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Other components Population ecology Abundance Allee effect Consumer-resource model Depensation Ecological yield Effective population size Intraspecific competition Logistic function Malthusian growth model Maximum sustainable yield Overpopulation Overexploitation Population cycle Population dynamics Population modeling Population size Predator–prey (Lotka–Volterra) equations Recruitment Small population size Stability Resilience Resistance Random generalized Lotka–Volterra model Species Biodiversity Density-dependent inhibition Ecological effects of biodiversity Ecological extinction Endemic species Flagship species Gradient analysis Indicator species Introduced species Invasive species / Native species Latitudinal gradients in species diversity Minimum viable population Neutral theory Occupancy–abundance relationship Population viability analysis Priority effect Rapoport's rule Relative abundance distribution Relative species abundance Species diversity Species homogeneity Species richness Species distribution Species–area curve Umbrella species Species interaction Antibiosis Biological interaction Commensalism Community ecology Ecological facilitation Interspecific competition Mutualism Parasitism Storage effect Symbiosis Spatial ecology Biogeography Cross-boundary subsidy Ecocline Ecotone Ecotype Disturbance Edge effects Foster's rule Habitat fragmentation Ideal free distribution Intermediate disturbance hypothesis Insular biogeography Land change modeling Landscape ecology Landscape epidemiology Landscape limnology Metapopulation Patch dynamics r / K selection theory Resource selection function Source–sink dynamics Niche Ecological trap Ecosystem engineer Environmental niche modelling Guild Habitat Marine Semiaquatic Terrestrial Limiting similarity Niche apportionment models Niche construction Niche differentiation Ontogenetic niche shift Other networks Assembly rules Bateman's principle Bioluminescence Ecological collapse Ecological debt Ecological deficit Ecological energetics Ecological indicator Ecological threshold Ecosystem diversity Emergence Extinction debt Kleiber's law Liebig's law of the minimum Marginal value theorem Thorson's rule Xerosere Other Allometry Alternative stable state Balance of nature Biological data visualization Ecological economics Ecological footprint Ecological forecasting Ecological humanities Ecological stoichiometry Ecopath Ecosystem based fisheries Endolith Evolutionary ecology Functional ecology Industrial ecology Macroecology Microecosystem Natural environment Regime shift Sexecology Systems ecology Urban ecology Theoretical ecology Outline of ecology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Patch_dynamics&oldid=1292291859 " Categories : Habitats Biogeography Landscape ecology Ecological restoration Habitat Biology terminology Environmental terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles lacking in-text citations from January 2010 All articles lacking in-text citations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2010 This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 06:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Patch dynamics 2 languages Add topic

