Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life cycle 2 Examples 3 Evolutionary history 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Sporophyte 51 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Asturianu বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Кыргызча Lietuvių Lombard Malagasy Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Diploid multicellular stage in the life cycle of a plant or alga Diagram showing the alternation of generations between a diploid sporophyte (bottom) and a haploid gametophyte (top) A sporophyte ( / ˈ s p ɔːr .

ə ˌ f aɪ t / ) is one of the two alternating multicellular phases in the life cycles of plants and algae . It is a diploid multicellular organism which produces asexual spores . This stage alternates with a multicellular haploid gametophyte phase.

Life cycle [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Sporophyte" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The sporophyte develops from the zygote produced when a haploid egg cell is fertilized by a haploid sperm and each sporophyte cell therefore has a double set of chromosomes , one set from each parent. All land plants , and most multicellular algae, have life cycles in which a multicellular diploid sporophyte phase alternates with a multicellular haploid gametophyte phase.

[ citation needed ] In the seed plants , the largest groups of which are the gymnosperms (bare seeds) and angiosperms (fruiting plants), the sporophyte phase is more prominent than the gametophyte, and is the familiar green plant with its roots, stem, leaves and cones or flowers. In flowering plants, the gametophytes are very reduced in size, and are represented by the germinated pollen and the embryo sac .

[ citation needed ] The sporophyte produces spores (hence the name) by meiosis , a process also known as "reduction division" that reduces the number of chromosomes in each spore mother cell by half. The resulting meiospores develop into a gametophyte. Both the spores and the resulting gametophyte are haploid, meaning they only have one set of chromosomes .

Meiosis in the diploid sporophyte provides a direct DNA repair capability for dealing with DNA damages , including oxidative DNA damages, in germline reproductive tissues.

[ 1 ] The mature gametophyte produces male or female gametes (or both) by mitosis .

The fusion of male and female gametes produces a diploid zygote which develops into a new sporophyte. This cycle is known as alternation of generations or alternation of phases.

Examples [ edit ] Young sporophytes of the common moss Tortula muralis . In mosses, the gametophyte is the dominant generation, while the sporophytes consist of sporangium-bearing stalks growing from the tips of the gametophytes Sporophytes of moss during spring In flowering plants , the sporophyte comprises the whole multicellular body except the pollen and embryo sac Bryophytes ( mosses , liverworts and hornworts ) have a dominant gametophyte phase on which the adult sporophyte is dependent for nutrition. The embryo sporophyte develops by cell division of the zygote within the female sex organ or archegonium , and in its early development is therefore nurtured by the gametophyte.

[ 2 ] Because this embryo-nurturing feature of the life cycle is common to all land plants they are known collectively as the embryophytes .

[ citation needed ] Cleistocarpous sporophyte of the moss Physcomitrella patens Most algae have dominant gametophyte generations, but in some species the gametophytes and sporophytes are morphologically similar ( isomorphic ). An independent sporophyte is the dominant form in all clubmosses , horsetails , ferns , gymnosperms, and angiosperms that have survived to the present day. Early land plants had sporophytes that produced identical spores ( isosporous or homosporous ) but the ancestors of the gymnosperms evolved complex heterosporous life cycles in which the spores producing male and female gametophytes were of different sizes, the female megaspores tending to be larger, and fewer in number, than the male microspores .

[ 3 ] Evolutionary history [ edit ] During the Devonian period several plant groups independently evolved heterospory and subsequently the habit of endospory, in which the gametophytes develop in miniaturized form inside the spore wall. By contrast in exosporous plants, including modern ferns, the gametophytes break the spore wall open on germination and develop outside it. The megagametophytes of endosporic plants such as the seed ferns developed within the sporangia of the parent sporophyte, producing a miniature multicellular female gametophyte complete with female sex organs, or archegonia. The oocytes were fertilized in the archegonia by free-swimming flagellate sperm produced by windborne miniaturized male gametophytes in the form of pre-pollen. The resulting zygote developed into the next sporophyte generation while still retained within the pre- ovule , the single large female meiospore or megaspore contained in the modified sporangium or nucellus of the parent sporophyte. The evolution of heterospory and endospory were among the earliest steps in the evolution of seeds of the kind produced by gymnosperms and angiosperms today. The rRNA genes seems to escape global methylation machinery in bryophytes, unlike seed plants.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Alternation of generations References [ edit ] ^ Hörandl E (June 2024).

"Apomixis and the paradox of sex in plants" .

Ann Bot .

134 (1): 1– 18.

doi : 10.1093/aob/mcae044 .

PMC 11161571 .

PMID 38497809 .

^ Reski R (February 1998). "Development, genetics and molecular biology of mosses".

Botanica Acta .

111 (1): 1– 5.

Bibcode : 1998BotAc.111....1R .

doi : 10.1111/j.1438-8677.1998.tb00670.x .

^ Bateman RM, Dimichele WA (1994). "Heterospory - the most iterative key innovation in the evolutionary history of the plant kingdom".

Biological Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society .

69 (3): 345– 417.

doi : 10.1111/j.1469-185x.1994.tb01276.x .

S2CID 29709953 .

^ Matyášek R, Krumpolcová A, Lunerová J, Mikulášková E, Rosselló JA, Kovařík A (2019).

"Unique Epigenetic Features of Ribosomal RNA Genes (rDNA) in Early Diverging Plants (Bryophytes)" .

Frontiers in Plant Science .

10 : 1066.

Bibcode : 2019FrPS...10.1066M .

doi : 10.3389/fpls.2019.01066 .

PMC 6739443 .

PMID 31543890 .

Further reading [ edit ] Kenrick P, Crane PR (September 1997). "The origin and early evolution of plants on land".

Nature .

389 (6646): 33– 39.

Bibcode : 1997Natur.389...33K .

doi : 10.1038/37918 .

S2CID 3866183 .

Taylor TN, Kerp H, Hass H (April 2005).

"Life history biology of early land plants: deciphering the gametophyte phase" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

102 (16): 5892– 7.

Bibcode : 2005PNAS..102.5892T .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0501985102 .

PMC 556298 .

PMID 15809414 .

Bell PR, Helmsley AR (2000).

Green plants. Their Origin and Diversity . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-64673-1 .

v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sporophyte&oldid=1292159197 " Categories : Plant morphology Plant reproduction Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2024 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2023 This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 14:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sporophyte 51 languages Add topic

