Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Foundation and Mission 2 International Symposium on Combustion 3 Institute Awards 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents The Combustion Institute 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The Combustion Institute Formation 1954 ( 1954 ) Type Non-profit educational society Purpose Combustion science Headquarters Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , U.S.

Location United States Region served World The Combustion Institute is an educational non-profit, international, scientific and engineering society whose purpose is to promote research in combustion science . The institute was established in 1954, and its headquarters are in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , United States. The current president of The Combustion Institute is Hai Wang (2024 - Present).

Foundation and Mission [ edit ] The support of this important field of study spanning many scientific and engineering disciplines is done through the discussion of research findings at regional, national and the biennial international symposia, and through the publication of the Proceedings of the Combustion Institute and the Institute's journals, Combustion and Flame and the affiliated journals Progress in Energy and Combustion Science , Combustion Science and Technology and Combustion Theory and Modelling .

[ 1 ] The Institute serves as the parent organization for thirty-six national sections organized in many geographical regions (the United States being divided into three sections) as of 2025: [ 2 ] Adria Australia/New Zealand Belarus Belgium Brazil Canada Chile China Egypt France Germany Great Britain Greece Hungary India Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Mexico Netherlands Poland Portugal Republic of Korea Russian Federation Saudi Arabia Scandinavian - Nordic Singapore Spain Sweden Taiwan Turkey USA Central States USA Eastern States USA Western States In honor of the fiftieth anniversary of The Combustion Institute, leading combustion scientists John D. Buckmaster , Paul Clavin , Amable Liñán , Moshe Matalon , Norbert Peters , Gregory Sivashinsky and Forman A. Williams wrote a paper in the Proceedings of the Combustion Institute .

[ 3 ] International Symposium on Combustion [ edit ] The International Symposium on Combustion (ISOC) is organized by The Combustion Institute biennially. The first symposium on combustion was held in 1928 in the United States and the first international symposium on combustion was held on 1948, even though The Combustion Institute itself was founded in 1954.

[ 4 ] Forty symposia have been held so far, with the 41st ISOC to be held in Kyoto, Japan in July 2026.

[ 5 ] Institute Awards [ edit ] During each ISOC, The Combustion Institute awards the following: [ 1 ] Bernard Lewis Gold Medal – established in 1958 and awarded for brilliant research in the field of combustion.

Alfred C. Egerton Gold Medal – established in 1958 and awarded biennially for distinguished, continuing and encouraging contributions to the field of combustion.

Silver Combustion Medal – established in 1958 and awarded to an outstanding paper presented at the previous symposium.

The Hottel Lecture.

Ya B. Zeldovich Gold Medal – established in 1990 and awarded for outstanding contribution to the theory of combustion or detonation.

Bernard Lewis Fellowship – established in 1996 during the 26th International Symposium, this award is awarded to encourage high quality research in combustion by young scientists and engineers.

Distinguished Paper Award – established in 1996 during the 31st International Symposium, this award is presented to the paper in each of the twelve colloquia of a  Symposium which is judged to be most distinguished in quality, achievement and significance.

Bernard Lewis Visiting Lecturer Fellowship.

Hiroshi Tsuji Early Career Researcher Award.

See also [ edit ] International Flame Research Foundation References [ edit ] ^ a b "The Combustion Institute website" . Retrieved 2025-05-27 .

^ Sections of The Combustion Institute [1] ^ Buckmaster, J; Clavin, P; Liñán, A; Matalon, M; Peters, N; Sivashinsky, G; Williams, F.A (2005).

"Combustion theory and modeling" .

Proceedings of the Combustion Institute .

30 (1): 1– 19.

Bibcode : 2005PComI..30....1B .

doi : 10.1016/j.proci.2004.08.280 .

^ "History | the Combustion Institute" .

The Combustion Institute | Promoting and disseminating combustion science research . 3 December 2015.

^ "41st International Symposium on Combustion" .

www.combustionsymposia.org . Retrieved 2025-05-27 .

v t e Fire History Control of fire by early humans Historic fires Native American use of fire in ecosystems Science Chain reaction Combustion Dust explosion Fire ecology Fire piston Flash point Fire protection Pyrolysis Spontaneous combustion Components Fuel Oxygen Heat Flame Smoke Individual fires By type By country By year Crime Arson Death by burning People Pyromanias Child Firefighter Culture Cremation Fire worship Terra preta Organizations International Flame Research Foundation The Combustion Institute Other Wildfires List of wildfires Backdraft Firefighting Firestorm Fire whirl Blue lava Ash Slash-and-burn Fire making Category Commons Wiktionary Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Norway Sweden Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Combustion_Institute&oldid=1293529540 " Categories : American engineering organizations Scientific organizations established in 1954 Combustion This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 06:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Combustion Institute 1 language Add topic

