Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Etymology and terminology 3 History 4 Natural law Toggle Natural law subsection 4.1 Aristotle 4.2 Thomas Aquinas 4.3 School of Salamanca 4.4 Lon Fuller 4.5 John Finnis 5 Analytic jurisprudence Toggle Analytic jurisprudence subsection 5.1 Historical school 5.2 Sociological jurisprudence 5.3 Legal positivism 5.3.1 Thomas Hobbes 5.3.2 Bentham and Austin 5.3.3 Hans Kelsen 5.3.4 H. L. A. Hart 5.3.5 Joseph Raz 5.4 Legal realism 5.5 Critical legal studies 5.6 Constitutionalism 5.7 Legal interpretivism 5.8 Therapeutic jurisprudence 6 Normative jurisprudence Toggle Normative jurisprudence subsection 6.1 Virtue jurisprudence 6.2 Deontology 6.3 Utilitarianism 6.4 John Rawls 7 Experimental jurisprudence 8 List of philosophers of law 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Citations 10.2 Notes 11 Bibliography 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Jurisprudence 86 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Boarisch Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Frysk Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ ភាសាខ្មែរ Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Shqip Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt Võro Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Legal philosophy ) Theoretical study of law For the "jurisprudence" of courts, see Case law .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( June 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Jurisprudence" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Philosophers of law ask, "What is law, and what should it be?" Part of a series on Law Foundations and Philosophy Definition Philosophy History Legal theory Jurisprudence Judicial interpretation Positive law Law and economics Sociology of law Methodological background Normative Prescriptive Jurimetrics Legal debate Legal and judicial opinions v t e Part of a series on Philosophy Philosophy portal Contents Outline Glossary History Categories Philosophies By period Ancient Egyptian Greek Roman Chinese Medieval Buddhism Neo-Confucianism Scholasticism Renaissance Modern Enlightenment Idealism Contemporary Analytic Continental By region African Egyptian Ethiopian South African Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Vietnamese Indigenous American Aztec Middle Eastern Iranian Western United States British French German Italian Russian By religion Buddhist Confucian Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Taoist Branches Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphysics Aesthetics Education History Language Law Metaphilosophy Mind Ontology Phenomenology Political Religion Science Philosophers Aesthetic philosophers Epistemologists Ethicists Logicians Metaphysicians Philosophers of mind Social and political philosophers Women in philosophy v t e Judicial interpretation Forms Constitutional review Judicial opinion In Catholic canon law In Islamic jurisprudence Kritarchy Statutory interpretation Judicial misconduct Activism Chilling effect Discretion Immunity Restraint Ultra vires General rules of interpretation Accountability Adversarial system Appeal Conflict of laws Forum shopping Jurisdictional arbitrage Lex loci Golden rule Inquisitorial system Interpretation Act Jury nullification Justiciability Letter and spirit of the law Mischief rule Nondelegation doctrine Plain meaning rule Polycentric law Precedent Reasonableness Rule according to higher law Separation of powers Judicial independence Parliamentary sovereignty General theories of interpretation Common good constitutionalism Court administration Judicial reform Jurisprudence Indeterminacy debate Legal realism Legal process Legal formalism Legitimacy Living Constitution / Living tree / Living instrument Opinio juris sive necessitatis Originalism ( original meaning ) Original intent ( legislative intent , legislative history ) Purposive approach Strict constructionism Textualism International Anarchy Hard law International litigation International legal theories Monism and dualism Peremptory norm Soft law Universal jurisdiction v t e Jurisprudence , also known as theory of law or philosophy of law , is the examination in a general perspective of what law is and what it ought to be. It investigates issues such as the definition of law; legal validity; legal norms and values; and the relationship between law and other fields of study, including economics , ethics , history , sociology , and political philosophy .

Modern jurisprudence began in the 18th century and was based on the first principles of natural law , civil law , and the law of nations . Contemporary philosophy of law addresses problems internal to law and legal systems and problems of law as a social institution that relates to the larger political and social context in which it exists. Jurisprudence can be divided into categories both by the type of question scholars seek to answer and by the theories of jurisprudence, or schools of thought, regarding how those questions are best answered: Natural law holds that there are rational objective limits to the power of rulers, the foundations of law are accessible through reason, and it is from these laws of nature that human laws gain force.

Analytic jurisprudence attempts to describe what law is. The two historically dominant theories in analytic jurisprudence are legal positivism and natural law theory . According to Legal Positivists , what law is and what law ought to be have no necessary connection to one another, so it is theoretically possible to engage in analytic jurisprudence without simultaneously engaging in normative jurisprudence. According to Natural Law Theorists , there is a necessary connection between what law is and what it ought to be, so it is impossible to engage in analytic jurisprudence without simultaniously engaging in normative jurisprudence.

Normative jurisprudence attempts to prescribe what law ought to be. It is concerned with the goal or purpose of law and what moral or political theories provide a foundation for the law. It attempts to determine what the proper function of law should be, what sorts of acts should be subject to legal sanctions, and what sorts of punishment should be permitted.

Sociological jurisprudence studies the nature and functions of law in the light of social scientific knowledge. It emphasises variation of legal phenomena between different cultures and societies. It relies especially on empirically-oriented social theory, but draws theoretical resources from diverse disciplines.

Experimental jurisprudence seeks to investigate the content of legal concepts using the methods of social science, unlike the philosophical methods of traditional jurisprudence.

The terms "philosophy of law" and "jurisprudence" are often used interchangeably, though jurisprudence sometimes encompasses forms of reasoning that fit into economics or sociology .

Overview [ edit ] Whereas lawyers are interested in what the law is on a specific issue in a specific jurisdiction, analytical philosophers of law are interested in identifying the features of law shared across cultures, times, and places. Taken together, these foundational features of law offer the kind of universal definition philosophers are after. The general approach allows philosophers to ask questions about, for example, what separates law from morality , politics, or practical reason .

[ 1 ] While the field has traditionally focused on giving an account of law's nature, some scholars have begun to examine the nature of domains within law, e.g.

tort law , contract law , or criminal law . These scholars focus on what makes certain domains of law distinctive and how one domain differs from another. A particularly fecund area of research has been the distinction between tort law and criminal law, which more generally bears on the difference between civil and criminal law.

[ 2 ] In addition to analytic jurisprudence, legal philosophy is also concerned with normative theories of law. "Normative jurisprudence involves normative, evaluative, and otherwise prescriptive questions about the law." [ 3 ] Etymology and terminology [ edit ] The English word is derived from the Latin, iurisprudentia .

[ 4 ] Iuris is the genitive form of ius meaning law, and prudentia meaning prudence (also: discretion, foresight, forethought, circumspection). It refers to the exercise of good judgment, common sense, and caution, especially in the conduct of practical matters. The word first appeared in written English [ 5 ] in 1628, at a time when the word prudence meant knowledge of, or skill in, a matter. It may have entered English via the French jurisprudence , which appeared earlier.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] History [ edit ] See also: Roman law § Jurisprudence Ancient jurisprudence begins with various Dharmaśāstra texts of India. Dharmasutras of Āpastaṃba and Baudhāyana are examples.

[ 8 ] In Ancient China, the Daoists , Confucians , and Legalists all had competing theories of jurisprudence.

[ 9 ] Jurisprudence in ancient Rome had its origins with the periti —experts in the jus mos maiorum (traditional law), a body of oral laws and customs.

Praetors established a working body of laws by judging whether or not singular cases were capable of being prosecuted either by the edicta , the annual pronunciation of prosecutable offences, or in extraordinary situations, additions made to the edicta . A iudex (originally a magistrate , later a private individual appointed to judge a specific case [ 10 ] ) would then prescribe a remedy according to the facts of the case.

The sentences of the iudex were supposed to be simple interpretations of the traditional customs, but—apart from considering what traditional customs applied in each case—soon developed a more equitable interpretation, coherently adapting the law to newer social exigencies. The law was then adjusted with evolving institutiones (legal concepts), while remaining in the traditional mode. Praetors were replaced in the 3rd century BC by a laical body of prudentes . Admission to this body was conditional upon proof of competence or experience. Under the Roman Empire , schools of law were created, and practice of the law became more academic. From the early Roman Empire to the 3rd century, a relevant body of literature was produced by groups of scholars, including the Proculians and Sabinians . The scientific nature of the studies was unprecedented in ancient times. After the 3rd century, juris prudentia became a more bureaucratic activity, with few notable authors. It was during the Eastern Roman Empire (5th century) that legal studies were once again undertaken in depth, and it is from this cultural movement that Justinian 's Corpus Juris Civilis was born.

Modern jurisprudence began in the 18th century and was based on the first principles of natural law , civil law , and the law of nations .

[ 11 ] Natural law [ edit ] Natural law holds that there are rational objective limits to the power of rulers, the foundations of law are accessible through reason, and it is from these laws of nature that human laws gain force.

[ 12 ] The moral theory of natural law asserts that law is inherent in nature and constitutive of morality, at least in part, and that an objective moral order, external to human legal systems, underlies natural law.

[ 3 ] On this view, while legislators can enact and even successfully enforce immoral laws, such laws are legally invalid. The view is captured by the maxim: " an unjust law is no law at all ", where 'unjust' means 'contrary to the natural law.' Natural law theory has medieval origins in the philosophy of Thomas Aquinas , especially in his Treatise on law . In late 20th century, John Finnis revived interest in the theory and provided a modern reworking of it.

[ 13 ] For one, Finnis has argued that the maxim "an unjust law is no law at all" is a poor guide to the classical Thomist position.

[ 14 ] In its general sense, natural law theory may be compared to both state-of-nature law and general law understood on the basis of being analogous to the laws of physical science. Natural law is often contrasted to positive law which asserts law as the product of human activity and human volition. Another approach to natural-law jurisprudence generally asserts that human law must be in response to compelling reasons for action. There are two readings of the natural-law jurisprudential stance.

The strong natural law thesis holds that if a human law fails to be in response to compelling reasons, then it is not properly a "law" at all. This is captured, imperfectly, in the famous maxim: lex iniusta non est lex (an unjust law is no law at all).

The weak natural law thesis holds that if a human law fails to be in response to compelling reasons, then it can still be called a "law", but it must be recognised as a defective law.

Aristotle [ edit ] Aristotle , by Francesco Hayez Aristotle is often said to be the father of natural law.

[ 15 ] Like his philosophical forefathers Socrates and Plato, Aristotle posited the existence of natural justice or natural right ( dikaion physikon , δικαίον φυσικόν , Latin ius naturale ). His association with natural law is largely due to how he was interpreted by Thomas Aquinas .

[ 16 ] This was based on Aquinas' conflation of natural law and natural right, the latter of which Aristotle posits in Book V of the Nicomachean Ethics (Book IV of the Eudemian Ethics ). Aquinas's influence was such as to affect a number of early translations of these passages, [ 17 ] though more recent translations render them more literally.

[ 18 ] Aristotle's theory of justice is bound up in his idea of the golden mean . Indeed, his treatment of what he calls "political justice" derives from his discussion of "the just" as a moral virtue derived as the mean between opposing vices, just like every other virtue he describes.

[ 19 ] His longest discussion of his theory of justice occurs in Nicomachean Ethics and begins by asking what sort of mean a just act is. He argues that the term "justice" actually refers to two different but related ideas: general justice and particular justice.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] When a person's actions toward others are completely virtuous in all matters, Aristotle calls them "just" in the sense of "general justice"; as such, this idea of justice is more or less coextensive with virtue.

[ 22 ] "Particular" or "partial justice", by contrast, is the part of "general justice" or the individual virtue that is concerned with treating others equitably.

[ 21 ] Aristotle moves from this unqualified discussion of justice to a qualified view of political justice, by which he means something close to the subject of modern jurisprudence. Of political justice, Aristotle argues that it is partly derived from nature and partly a matter of convention.

[ 23 ] This can be taken as a statement that is similar to the views of modern natural law theorists. But it must also be remembered that Aristotle is describing a view of morality, not a system of law, and therefore his remarks as to nature are about the grounding of the morality enacted as law, not the laws themselves.

The best evidence of Aristotle's having thought there was a natural law comes from the Rhetoric , where Aristotle notes that, aside from the "particular" laws that each people has set up for itself, there is a "common" law that is according to nature.

[ 24 ] The context of this remark, however, suggests only that Aristotle thought that it could be rhetorically advantageous to appeal to such a law, especially when the "particular" law of one's own city was adverse to the case being made, not that there actually was such a law.

[ 25 ] Aristotle, moreover, considered certain candidates for a universally valid, natural law to be wrong.

[ 26 ] Aristotle's theoretical paternity of the natural law tradition is consequently disputed.

[ 27 ] Thomas Aquinas [ edit ] Main articles: Thomas Aquinas and Treatise on Law Thomas Aquinas was the most influential Western medieval legal scholar.

Thomas Aquinas is the foremost classical proponent of natural theology , and the father of the Thomistic school of philosophy, for a long time the primary philosophical approach of the Roman Catholic Church . The work for which he is best known is the Summa Theologiae . One of the thirty-five Doctors of the Church , he is considered by many Catholics to be the Church's greatest theologian. Consequently, many institutions of learning have been named after him.

Aquinas distinguished four kinds of law: eternal, natural, divine, and human: Eternal law refers to divine reason, known only to God. It is God's plan for the universe. Man needs this plan, for without it he would totally lack direction.

Natural law is the "participation" in the eternal law by rational human creatures, and is discovered by reason Divine law is revealed in the scriptures and is God's positive law for mankind Human law is supported by reason and enacted for the common good.

[ 28 ] Natural law is based on "first principles": [ 29 ] ... this is the first precept of the law, that good is to be done and promoted, and evil is to be avoided. All other precepts of the natural law are based on this ...

The desires to live and to procreate are counted by Aquinas among those basic (natural) human values on which all other human values are based.

School of Salamanca [ edit ] Main articles: School of Salamanca and ius gentium Francisco de Vitoria was perhaps the first to develop a theory of ius gentium (law of  nations), and thus is an important figure in the transition to modernity. He extrapolated his ideas of legitimate sovereign power to international affairs, concluding that such affairs ought to be determined by forms respecting of the rights of all and that the common good of the world should take precedence before the good of any single state. This meant that relations between states ought to pass from being justified by force to being justified by law and justice. Some scholars have upset the standard account of the origins of International law, which emphasises the seminal text De iure belli ac pacis by Hugo Grotius , and argued for Vitoria and, later, Suárez's importance as forerunners and, potentially, founders of the field.

[ 30 ] Others, such as Koskenniemi, have argued that none of these humanist and scholastic thinkers can be understood to have founded international law in the modern sense, instead placing its origins in the post-1870 period.

[ 31 ] Francisco Suárez , regarded as among the greatest scholastics after Aquinas, subdivided the concept of ius gentium . Working with already well-formed categories, he carefully distinguished ius inter gentes from ius intra gentes .

Ius inter gentes (which corresponds to modern international law) was something common to the majority of countries, although, being positive law, not natural law, it was not necessarily universal. On the other hand, ius intra gentes , or civil law, is specific to each nation.

Lon Fuller [ edit ] Main article: Lon L. Fuller Writing after World War II , Lon L. Fuller defended a secular and procedural form of natural law. He emphasised that the (natural) law must meet certain formal requirements (such as being impartial and publicly knowable). To the extent that an institutional system of social control falls short of these requirements, Fuller argued, we are less inclined to recognise it as a system of law, or to give it our respect. Thus, the law must have a morality that goes beyond the societal rules under which laws are made.

John Finnis [ edit ] Main article: John Finnis Sophisticated positivist and natural law theories sometimes resemble each other and may have certain points in common. Identifying a particular theorist as a positivist or a natural law theorist sometimes involves matters of emphasis and degree, and the particular influences on the theorist's work. The natural law theorists of the distant past, such as Aquinas and John Locke made no distinction between analytic and normative jurisprudence, while modern natural law theorists, such as John Finnis, who claim to be positivists, still argue that law is moral by nature. In his book Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980, 2011), John Finnis provides a restatement of natural law doctrine.

[ 32 ] Analytic jurisprudence [ edit ] Main article: Analytic jurisprudence Unlike experimental jurisprudence , which investigates the content of legal concepts using the methods of social science , [ 33 ] analytical jurisprudence seeks to provide a general account of the nature of law through the tools of conceptual analysis . The account is general in the sense of targeting universal features of law that hold at all times and places.

[ 1 ] Analytic, or clarificatory , jurisprudence takes a neutral point of view and uses descriptive language when referring to various aspects of legal systems. This was a philosophical development that rejected natural law's fusing of what law is and what it ought to be.

[ 34 ] David Hume argued, in A Treatise of Human Nature , [ 35 ] that people invariably slip from describing what the world is to asserting that we therefore ought to follow a particular course of action. But as a matter of pure logic, one cannot conclude that we ought to do something merely because something is the case. So analysing and clarifying the way the world is must be treated as a strictly separate question from normative and evaluative questions of what ought to be done.

The most important questions of analytic jurisprudence are: "What are laws?"; "What is the law?"; "What is the relationship between law and power/sociology?"; and "What is the relationship between law and morality?" Legal positivism is the dominant theory, although there is a growing number of critics who offer their own interpretations.

Historical school [ edit ] Historical jurisprudence came to prominence during the debate on the proposed codification of German law . In his book On the Vocation of Our Age for Legislation and Jurisprudence , [ 36 ] Friedrich Carl von Savigny argued that Germany did not have a legal language that would support codification because the traditions, customs, and beliefs of the German people did not include a belief in a code. Historicists believe that law originates with society.

Sociological jurisprudence [ edit ] Main article: Sociology of Law An effort systematically to inform jurisprudence from sociological insights developed from the beginning of the twentieth century, as sociology began to establish itself as a distinct social science , especially in the United States and in continental Europe . In Germany, Austria and France , the work of the "free law" theorists (e.g. Ernst Fuchs, Hermann Kantorowicz , Eugen Ehrlich and François Gény ) encouraged the use of sociological insights in the development of legal and juristic theory. The most internationally influential advocacy for a "sociological jurisprudence" occurred in the United States, where, throughout the first half of the twentieth century, Roscoe Pound , for many years the Dean of Harvard Law School , used this term to characterise his legal philosophy . In the United States, many later writers followed Pound's lead or developed distinctive approaches to sociological jurisprudence. In Australia, Julius Stone strongly defended and developed Pound's ideas.

In the 1930s, a significant split between the sociological jurists and the American legal realists emerged. In the second half of the twentieth century, sociological jurisprudence as a distinct movement declined as jurisprudence came more strongly under the influence of analytical legal philosophy; but with increasing criticism of dominant orientations of legal philosophy in English-speaking countries in the present century, it has attracted renewed interest. Increasingly, its contemporary focus is on providing theoretical resources for jurists to aid their understanding of new types of regulation (for example, the diverse kinds of developing transnational law) and the increasingly important interrelations of law and culture, especially in multicultural Western societies.

[ a ] As an approach to jurisprudence, sociological jurisprudence uses the resources of social science to serve value-oriented juristic purposes. As such, it should be distinguished from sociology of law which as a field of social science has no necessary commitment to juristic aims.

Legal positivism [ edit ] Main article: Legal positivism Legal positivism is the view that the content of law is dependent on social facts and that a legal system's existence is not constrained by morality.

[ 37 ] Within legal positivism, theorists agree that law's content is a product of social facts, but theorists disagree whether law's validity can be explained by incorporating moral values.

[ 38 ] Legal positivists who argue against the incorporation of moral values to explain law's validity are labeled exclusive (or hard) legal positivists.

Joseph Raz's legal positivism is an example of exclusive legal positivism. Legal positivists who argue that law's validity can be explained by incorporating moral values are labeled inclusive (or soft) legal positivists. The legal positivist theories of H. L. A. Hart and Jules Coleman are examples of inclusive legal positivism.

[ 39 ] Legal positivism has traditionally been associated with three doctrines: the pedigree thesis, the separability thesis, and the discretion thesis.

[ 40 ] The pedigree thesis says that the right way to determine whether a directive is law is to look at the directive's source. The thesis claims that it is the fact that the directive was issued by the proper official within a legitimate government, for example, that determines the directive's legal validity—not the directive's moral or practical merits. The separability thesis states that law is conceptually distinct from morality.

[ 40 ] While law might contain morality, the separability thesis states that "it is in no sense a necessary truth that laws reproduce or satisfy certain demands of morality, though in fact they have often done so." [ 41 ] Legal positivists disagree about the extent of the separability thesis. Exclusive legal positivists, notably Joseph Raz , go further than the standard thesis and deny that it is possible for morality to be a part of law at all. The discretion thesis states that judges create new law when they are given discretion to adjudicate cases where existing law underdetermines the result.

Thomas Hobbes [ edit ] Main article: Thomas Hobbes Hobbes was a social contractarian [ 42 ] and believed that the law had peoples' tacit consent. He believed that society was formed from a state of nature to protect people from the state of war that would exist otherwise. In Leviathan , Hobbes argues that without an ordered society life would be "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short." [ 43 ] It is commonly said that Hobbes's views on human nature were influenced by his times. The English Civil War and the Cromwellian dictatorship had taken place; and, in reacting to that, Hobbes felt that absolute authority vested in a monarch, whose subjects obeyed the law, was the basis of a civilized society.

Bentham and Austin [ edit ] Main articles: Jeremy Bentham and John Austin (legal philosopher) Bentham's utilitarian theories remained dominant in law until the twentieth century.

John Austin and Jeremy Bentham were early legal positivists who sought to provide a descriptive account of law that describes the law as it is. Austin explained the descriptive focus for legal positivism by saying, "The existence of law is one thing; its merit and demerit another. Whether it be or be not is one enquiry; whether it be or be not conformable to an assumed standard, is a different enquiry." [ 44 ] For Austin and Bentham, a society is governed by a sovereign who has de facto authority. Through the sovereign's authority come laws, which for Austin and Bentham are commands backed by sanctions for non-compliance. Along with Hume, Bentham was an early and staunch supporter of the utilitarian concept, and was an avid prison reformer, advocate for democracy , and firm atheist . Bentham's views about law and jurisprudence were popularized by his student John Austin . Austin was the first chair of law at the new University of London , from 1829. Austin's utilitarian answer to "what is law?" was that law is "commands, backed by threat of sanctions, from a sovereign, to whom people have a habit of obedience".

[ 45 ] H. L. A. Hart criticized Austin and Bentham's early legal positivism because the command theory failed to account for individual's compliance with the law.

Hans Kelsen [ edit ] Main article: Hans Kelsen Hans Kelsen is considered one of the preeminent jurists of the 20th century and has been highly influential in Europe and Latin America, although less so in common law countries. His Pure Theory of Law describes law as "binding norms", while at the same time refusing to evaluate those norms. That is, "legal science" is to be separated from "legal politics". Central to the Pure Theory of Law is the notion of a ' basic norm ' ( Grundnorm )—a hypothetical norm, presupposed by the jurist, from which all "lower" norms in the hierarchy of a legal system , beginning with constitutional law , are understood to derive their authority or the extent to which they are binding. Kelsen contends that the extent to which legal norms are binding, their specifically "legal" character, can be understood without tracing it ultimately to some suprahuman source such as God, personified Nature or—of great importance in his time—a personified State or Nation.

H. L. A. Hart [ edit ] Main article: H. L. A. Hart In the English-speaking world, the most influential legal positivist of the twentieth century was H. L. A. Hart , professor of jurisprudence at Oxford University . Hart argued that the law should be understood as a system of social rules. In The Concept of Law , Hart rejected Kelsen's views that sanctions were essential to law and that a normative social phenomenon, like law, cannot be grounded in non-normative social facts.

Hart claimed that law is the union of primary rules and secondary rules.

[ 46 ] Primary rules require individuals to act or not act in certain ways and create duties for the governed to obey.
Secondary rules are rules that confer authority to create new primary rules or modify existing ones.

[ 47 ] Secondary rules are divided into rules of adjudication (how to resolve legal disputes), rules of change (how laws are amended), and the rule of recognition (how laws are identified as valid). The validity of a legal system comes from the "rule of recognition", which is a customary practice of officials (especially barristers and judges) who identify certain acts and decisions as sources of law. In 1981, Neil MacCormick [ 48 ] wrote a pivotal book on Hart (second edition published in 2008), which further refined and offered some important criticisms that led MacCormick to develop his own theory (the best example of which is his Institutions of Law , 2007). Other important critiques include those of Ronald Dworkin , John Finnis, and Joseph Raz .

In recent years, debates on the nature of law have become increasingly fine-grained. One important debate is within legal positivism. One school is sometimes called "exclusive legal positivism" and is associated with the view that the legal validity of a norm can never depend on its moral correctness. A second school is labeled "inclusive legal positivism", a major proponent of which is Wil Waluchow, and is associated with the view that moral considerations may , but do not necessarily, determine the legal validity of a norm.

Joseph Raz [ edit ] Main article: Joseph Raz Joseph Raz's theory of legal positivism argues against the incorporation of moral values to explain law's validity. In Raz's 1979 book The Authority of Law , he criticised what he called the "weak social thesis" to explain law.

[ 49 ] He formulates the weak social thesis as "(a) Sometimes the identification of some laws turn on moral arguments, but also with, (b) In all legal systems the identification of some law turns on moral argument." [ 50 ] Raz argues that law's authority is identifiable purely through social sources, without reference to moral reasoning.

[ 50 ] This view he calls "the sources thesis".

[ 51 ] Raz suggests that any categorisation of rules beyond their role as authority is better left to sociology than to jurisprudence.

[ 52 ] Some philosophers used to contend that positivism was the theory that held that there was "no necessary connection" between law and morality; but influential contemporary positivists—including Joseph Raz, John Gardner , and Leslie Green —reject that view. Raz claims it is a necessary truth that there are vices that a legal system cannot possibly have (for example, it cannot commit rape or murder).

Legal realism [ edit ] Main article: Legal realism Oliver Wendell Holmes was a self-styled legal realist.

Legal realism is the view that a theory of law should be descriptive and account for the reasons why judges decide cases as they do.

[ 53 ] Legal realism had some affinities with the sociology of law and sociological jurisprudence. The essential tenet of legal realism is that all law is made by humans and thus should account for reasons besides legal rules that led to a legal decision.

There are two separate schools of legal realism: American legal realism and Scandinavian legal realism. American legal realism grew out of the writings of Oliver Wendell Holmes . At the start of Holmes's The Common Law , he claims that "[t]he life of the law has not been logic: it has been experience".

[ 54 ] This view was a reaction to legal formalism that was popular the time due to the Christopher Columbus Langdell .

[ 55 ] Holmes's writings on jurisprudence also laid the foundations for the predictive theory of law. In his article "The Path of the Law", Holmes argues that "the object of [legal] study...is prediction, the prediction of the incidence of the public force through the instrumentality of the courts." [ 56 ] For the American legal realists of the early twentieth century, legal realism sought to describe the way judges decide cases. For legal realists such as Jerome Frank , judges start with the facts before them and then move to legal principles. Before legal realism, theories of jurisprudence turned this method around where judges were thought to begin with legal principles and then look to facts.

It has become common today to identify Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr., as the main precursor of American Legal Realism (other influences include Roscoe Pound , Karl Llewellyn , and Justice Benjamin Cardozo ). Karl Llewellyn, another founder of the U.S. legal realism movement, similarly believed that the law is little more than putty in the hands of judges who are able to shape the outcome of cases based on their personal values or policy choices.

[ 57 ] The Scandinavian school of legal realism argued that law can be explained through the empirical methods used by social scientists.

[ 58 ] Prominent Scandinavian legal realists are Alf Ross , Axel Hägerström , and Karl Olivecrona . Scandinavian legal realists also took a naturalist approach to law.

[ 59 ] Despite its decline in popularity, legal realism continues to influence a wide spectrum of jurisprudential schools today, including critical legal studies , feminist legal theory , critical race theory , sociology of law , and law and economics .

[ 60 ] Critical legal studies [ edit ] Critical legal studies are a new theory of jurisprudence that has developed since the 1970s. In 1977 a group of members of the Law and Society Association struck out on a new theoretical direction. The legal ideas of Peter Gabel , Morton Horwitz , Duncan Kennedy , Karl Klare , Mark Tushnet , and Roberto Unger have now found influence in many law schools.

[ 61 ] The theory can generally be traced to American legal realism and is considered "the first movement in legal theory and legal scholarship in the United States to have espoused a committed Left political stance and perspective".

[ 62 ] It holds that the law is largely contradictory, and can be best analyzed as an expression of the policy goals of a dominant social group.

[ 63 ] Roberto Mangabeira Unger and other authors in the movement contrast critical legal studies as a method, critical in approach, from the impersonal purposes and principles made necessary in legal reasoning such as formalism . He writes that it was "consequently also by rejecting judges as the chief addressees of legal analysis, and refusing to take the question—how should judges decide cases?—as the defining problem in jurisprudence." [ 64 ] According to Unger the new American legal analysis will unlock the democratic potential of free societies in the same way earlier capitalistic economies benefited from the protection of private rights such as contracts and property.

[ 65 ] Constitutionalism [ edit ] These paragraphs are an excerpt from Constitutionalism .

[ edit ] Constitutionalism is "a compound of ideas, attitudes, and patterns of behavior elaborating the principle that the authority of government derives from and is limited by a body of fundamental law ".

[ 66 ] Legal interpretivism [ edit ] Main article: Interpretivism (legal) American legal philosopher Ronald Dworkin 's legal theory attacks legal positivists that separate law's content from morality.

[ 67 ] In his book Law's Empire , [ 68 ] Dworkin argued that law is an "interpretive" concept that requires barristers to find the best-fitting and most just solution to a legal dispute, given their constitutional traditions. According to him, law is not entirely based on social facts, but includes the best moral justification for the institutional facts and practices that form a society's legal tradition. It follows from Dworkin's view that one cannot know whether a society has a legal system in force, or what any of its laws are, until one knows some truths about the moral justifications of the social and political practices of that society. It is consistent with Dworkin's view—in contrast with the views of legal positivists or legal realists—that no-one in a society may know what its laws are, because no-one may know the best moral justification for its practices.

Interpretation, according to Dworkin's "integrity theory of law", has two dimensions. To count as an interpretation, the reading of a text must meet the criterion of "fit". Of those interpretations that fit, however, Dworkin maintains that the correct interpretation is the one that portrays the practices of the community in their best light, or makes them "the best that they can be". But many writers have doubted whether there is a single best moral justification for the complex practices of any given community, and others have doubted whether, even if there is, it should be counted as part of the law of that community.

Therapeutic jurisprudence [ edit ] Main article: Therapeutic jurisprudence Consequences of the operation of legal rules or legal procedures—or of the behavior of legal actors (such as lawyers and judges)—may be either beneficial (therapeutic) or harmful (anti-therapeutic) to people.

Therapeutic jurisprudence ("TJ") studies law as a social force (or agent) and uses social science methods and data to study the extent to which a legal rule or practice affects the psychological well-being of the people it impacts.

[ 69 ] Normative jurisprudence [ edit ] See also: Political philosophy In addition to the question, "What is law?", legal philosophy is also concerned with normative, or "evaluative" theories of law. What is the goal or purpose of law? What moral or political theories provide a foundation for the law? What is the proper function of law? What sorts of acts should be subject to punishment , and what sorts of punishment should be permitted? What is justice? What rights do we have? Is there a duty to obey the law? What value has the rule of law? Some of the different schools and leading thinkers are discussed below.

Virtue jurisprudence [ edit ] Plato (left) and Aristotle (right), a detail of The School of Athens Main article: Virtue jurisprudence Aretaic moral theories, such as contemporary virtue ethics , emphasize the role of character in morality. Virtue jurisprudence is the view that the laws should promote the development of virtuous character in citizens. Historically, this approach has been mainly associated with Aristotle or Thomas Aquinas. Contemporary virtue jurisprudence is inspired by philosophical work on virtue ethics.

Deontology [ edit ] Main article: Deontological ethics Deontology is the "theory of duty or moral obligation".

[ 70 ] The philosopher Immanuel Kant formulated one influential deontological theory of law. He argued that any rule we follow must be able to be universally applied, i.e. we must be willing for everyone to follow that rule. A contemporary deontological approach can be found in the work of the legal philosopher Ronald Dworkin.

Utilitarianism [ edit ] Mill believed law should create happiness.

Main article: Utilitarianism See also: Lysander Spooner Utilitarianism is the view that the laws should be crafted so as to produce the best consequences for the greatest number of people. Historically, utilitarian thinking about law has been associated with the philosopher Jeremy Bentham. John Stuart Mill was a pupil of Bentham's and was the torch bearer for utilitarian philosophy throughout the late nineteenth century.

[ 71 ] In contemporary legal theory, the utilitarian approach is frequently championed by scholars who work in the law and economics tradition.

[ 60 ] John Rawls [ edit ] Main articles: John Rawls and A Theory of Justice John Rawls was an American philosopher; a professor of political philosophy at Harvard University ; and author of A Theory of Justice (1971), Political Liberalism , Justice as Fairness: A Restatement , and The Law of Peoples . He is widely considered one of the most important English-language political philosophers of the 20th century.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] His theory of justice uses a method called "original position" to ask us which principles of justice we would choose to regulate the basic institutions of our society if we were behind a "veil of ignorance". Imagine we do not know who we are—our race, sex, wealth, status, class, or any distinguishing feature—so that we would not be biased in our own favour. Rawls argued from this "original position" that we would choose exactly the same political liberties for everyone, like freedom of speech, the right to vote, and so on. Also, we would choose a system where there is only inequality because that produces incentives enough for the economic well-being of all society, especially the poorest. This is Rawls's famous "difference principle". Justice is fairness, in the sense that the fairness of the original position of choice guarantees the fairness of the principles chosen in that position.

There are many other normative approaches to the philosophy of law , including constitutionalism , critical legal studies and libertarian theories of law .

Experimental jurisprudence [ edit ] Main article: Experimental jurisprudence Experimental jurisprudence seeks to investigate the content of legal concepts using the methods of social science, unlike the philosophical methods of traditional jurisprudence.

[ 33 ] List of philosophers of law [ edit ] Plato Aristotle Thomas Aquinas Francis Bacon John Locke Francisco Suarez Francisco de Vitoria Hugo Grotius John Austin Frederic Bastiat Evgeny Pashukanis Jeremy Bentham Emilio Betti Norberto Bobbio António Castanheira Neves Jules Coleman Ronald Dworkin Francesco D'Agostino Francisco Elías de Tejada y Spínola Carlos Cossio Miguel Reale John Finnis Lon L. Fuller Leslie Green Robert P. George Germain Grisez H. L. A. Hart Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.

Alf Ross Tony Honoré Rudolf Jhering Johann Gottlieb Fichte Hans Kelsen Joel Feinberg David Lyons Robert Alexy Reinhold Zippelius Neil MacCormick William E. May Martha Nussbaum François Ost Gustav Radbruch Joseph Raz Jeremy Waldron Friedrich Carl von Savigny Robert Summers Roberto Unger Catharine MacKinnon John Rawls Pierre Schlag Robin West Carl Schmitt Jürgen Habermas Carlos Santiago Nino Geoffrey Warnock Scott J. Shapiro Shen Buhai Shang Yang Han Fei Zhu Xi Roscoe Pound Julius von Kirchmann Montesquieu Upendra Baxi See also [ edit ] Analytical jurisprudence Artificial intelligence and law Brocard (law) Cautelary jurisprudence Comparative law Constitution Constitutional law Constitutional economics Critical race theory Critical rationalism Defeasible reasoning Divine law Feminist jurisprudence Feminist legal theory Fiqh International legal theory Judicial activism Justice Law and economics Law and literature Legal formalism Legal history Legalism Legal pluralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legal science Libertarian theories of law Living Constitution Models of judicial decision making Originalism Natural law New legal realism Political jurisprudence Postmodernist jurisprudence Publius Juventius Celsus Philosophy of law Rule of law Rule according to higher law Sociological jurisprudence Sociology of law Strict interpretation Virtue jurisprudence References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b Marmor, Andrei; Sarch, Alexander (2015), "The Nature of Law" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2015 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 15 May 2019 ^ Edwards, James (2018), "Theories of Criminal Law" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2018 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 21 May 2019 ^ a b "Philosophy of Law" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ "jurisprudence - Wiktionary" .

en.wiktionary.org . Retrieved 24 May 2019 .

^ Oxford English Dictionary , 2nd edition 1989 ^ Postema, Gerald J. (2011). "Economic Jurisprudence". In Postema, G.J. (ed.).

A Treatise of Legal Philosophy and General Jurisprudence: Volume 11: Legal Philosophy in the Twentieth Century: The Common Law World . Springer Netherlands. pp.

181– 211.

doi : 10.1007/978-90-481-8960-1_5 .

ISBN 9789048189601 .

^ Kornhauser, Lewis (2017), "The Economic Analysis of Law" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2017 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 17 May 2019 ^ Katju, Markandey (27 November 2010).

"Ancient Indian Jurisprudence" (PDF) .

Banaras Hindu University . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 November 2011 . Retrieved 11 April 2019 .

^ Chang, Wejen (Spring 2010).

"Classical Chinese Jurisprudence and the Development of the Chinese Legal System" .

Tsinghua China Law Review .

2 (2). Archived from the original on 18 December 2021 . Retrieved 27 June 2019 .

^ Adolf Berger, s.v.

iudex , Encyclopedic Dictionary of Roman Law (American Philological Society, 1953, 1991), p. 518.

^ Garner 2009 , Jurisprudence entry.

^ Shiner, "Philosophy of Law", Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy ^ Finnis, John (2016), "Natural Law Theories" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 17 May 2019 ^ Golding, Martin P.; Edmundson, William A., eds. (2013).

The Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of Law and Legal Theory . Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishing .

ISBN 9781782683131 .

OCLC 841495455 .

^ Shellens, "Aristotle on Natural Law." ^ Jaffa, Thomism and Aristotelianism .

^ H. Rackham, trans., Nicomachean Ethics , Loeb Classical Library; J. A. K. Thomson, trans. (revised by Hugh Tedennick), Nicomachean Ethics , Penguin Classics.

^ Joe Sachs, trans., Nicomachean Ethics , Focus Publishing ^ "Nicomachean Ethics" Bk. II ch. 6 ^ Nicomachean Ethics . Translated by Irwin, Terrence (2nd ed.).

^ a b Nicomachean Ethics , Bk. V, ch. 3 ^ "Nicomachean Ethics", Bk. V, ch. 1 ^ Nicomachean Ethics , Bk. V, ch. 7.

^ Rhetoric 1373b2–8.

^ Shellens, "Aristotle on Natural Law", 75–81 ^ "Natural Law", International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences .

^ "Greek Theory of Natural Law" .

^ Louis Pojman , Ethics ( Belmont , CA : Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1995) ^ "Summa Theologica" .

^ e.g. James Brown Scott, cited in Cavallar, The Rights of Strangers: theories of international hospitality, the global community, and political justice since Vitoria , p.164 ^ Koskenniemi: "International Law and raison d'état: Rethinking the Prehistory of International Law", in Kingsbury & Strausmann, The Roman Foundations of the Law of Nations , pp. 297–339 ^ Finnis, John (1980).

Natural Law and Natural Rights . Oxford: Clarendon Press. pp.

18– 19.

^ a b Sommers, Roseanna (23 July 2021).

"Experimental jurisprudence" .

Science .

373 (6553): 394– 395.

Bibcode : 2021Sci...373..394S .

doi : 10.1126/science.abf0711 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 34437107 .

S2CID 236179587 .

^ See H L A Hart, 'Positivism and the Separation of Law and Morals' (1958) 71 Harv. L. Rev.

593 ^ David Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature (1739) Etext Archived 20 August 2006 at the Wayback Machine ^ Friedrich Carl von Savigny, On the Vocation of Our Age for Legislation and Jurisprudence (Abraham A. Hayward trans., 1831) ^ Green, Leslie (Spring 2018).

"Legal Positivism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 4 December 2023.

^ Murphy 2006 , pp. 132–135.

^ Himma, Kenneth Einar.

"Legal Positivism" .

The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 31 May 2019 .

^ a b Himma, Kenneth Einar (15 May 2019).

"Philosophy of Law" .

The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Hart, H. L. A. (1994).

The Concept of Law, Second Edition . Oxford University Press. pp.

181– 182.

ISBN 978-0199644704 .

^ Martinich, A.P. (2013).

Hobbes . New York: Routledge. p. 54.

ISBN 9781135180799 .

^ Hobbes, Thomas (1668).

"Of the Natural Condition of Mankind" . In Curley, Edwin (ed.).

Leviathan: With selected variants from the Latin edition of 1668 . Hackett Publishing. p. 76.

ISBN 9781603844857 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Austin, John (1832).

The province of jurisprudence determined; and, the uses of the study of jurisprudence . Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Pub. p. 184.

ISBN 0872204332 .

OCLC 39539515 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ John Austin, The Providence of Jurisprudence Determined (1831) ^ Hart 2012 , pp. 79–99.

^ Hart 2012 , p. 81.

^ "The University of Edinburgh" . Archived from the original on 1 June 2006 . Retrieved 24 May 2006 .

^ Raz, Joseph (1979).

The Authority of Law: Essays on Law and Morality . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 45.

ISBN 9780199573561 .

^ a b Raz, Joseph (1979).

The Authority of Law: Essays on Law and Morality . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 47.

ISBN 9780199573561 .

^ Raz, Joseph (1979).

The Authority of Law: Essays on Law and Morality . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

47– 48.

ISBN 9780199573561 .

^ ch. 2, Joseph Raz, The Authority of Law (1979) ^ Leiter, Brian (December 1997).

"Rethinking Legal Realism: Toward a Naturalized Jurisprudence" .

Texas Law Review .

76 : 268.

^ Holmes, O.W. Jr. (1881).

The Common Law . Boston: Little, Brown, and Co. p. 1.

^ Langdell, C.C. (1871).

A Selection of Cases on the Law of Contracts . Boston: Little, Brown, and Co. pp. vi.

^ Holmes, O.W. (1897). "The Path of the Law".

Harvard Law Review .

10 (8): 457– 478.

doi : 10.2307/1322028 .

JSTOR 1322028 .

^ "Jurisprudence". West's Encyclopedia of American Law. Ed. Jeffrey Lehman, Shirelle
Phelps. Detroit: Thomson/Gale, 2005.

^ Schauer, Frederick (2009).

Thinking Like a Lawyer . Cambridge: Harvard University Press. pp. 124 n.1.

ISBN 9780674032705 .

^ Olivecrona, Karl (1971).

Law as Fact . London: Stevens & Sons. pp. vii.

ISBN 978-0420432506 .

^ a b Grechenig & Gelter 2008 , pp. 295–360.

^ Hutchinson, Allan C.; Monahan, Patrick J. (1984).

"Law, Politics, and the Critical Legal Scholars: The Unfolding Drama of American Legal Thought" .

Stanford Law Review .

36 (1/2): 199– 245.

doi : 10.2307/1228683 .

JSTOR 1228683 .

^ Alan Hunt, "The Theory of Critical Legal Studies", Oxford Journal of Legal Studies, Vol. 6, No. 1 (1986): 1-45, esp. 1, 5. See [1] . DOI, 10.1093/ojls/6.1.1.

^ Moore, "Critical Legal Studies", Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy ^ Unger, Roberto (2015).

The Critical Legal Studies Movement: Another Time, A Greater Task . London, England: Verso Books. p. 13.

ISBN 978-1781683415 .

^ Unger. (2015). pp. 1-8.

^ Don E. Fehrenbacher, Constitutions and Constitutionalism in the Slaveholding South (University of Georgia Press, 1989). p. 1.

ISBN 978-0-8203-1119-7 .

^ Brooks, "Review of Dworkin and His Critics with Replies by Dworkin", Modern Law Review , vol. 69 no. 6 ^ Ronald Dworkin, Law's Empire (1986) Harvard University Press ^ Wexler, David B ; Perlin, Michael L ; Vols, Michel; et al. (December 2016).

"Editorial: Current Issues in Therapeutic Jurisprudence" .

QUT Law Review .

16 (3): 1– 3.

doi : 10.5204/qutlr.v16i3.692 .

ISSN 2201-7275 .

^ Webster's New World Dictionary of the American Language, p. 378 (2d Coll. Ed. 1978).

^ see, Utilitarianism Archived 5 May 2007 at the Wayback Machine at Metalibri Digital Library ^ Nussbaum, Martha (20 July 2001).

"The Enduring Significance of John Rawls" (PDF) .

The Chronicle of Higher Education .

John Rawls, who turned 80 this year, is the most distinguished moral and political philosopher of our age.

^ Dorf, Michael C.

(11 December 2002).

"In Praise of John Rawls, The Man Who Made Moral Philosophy Respectable Again – And Whose Views Also Profoundly Informed American Legal Thought" .

FindLaw .

Rawls remained the most important American philosopher since John Dewey.

^ Jedediah, Purdy (29 October 2019).

"What John Rawls Missed" .

The New Republic .

John Rawls, who died in 2002, was the most influential American philosopher of the twentieth century.

Notes [ edit ] ^ For full discussion see Cotterrell 2018 Bibliography [ edit ] Garner, Bryan A. (2009).

Black's law dictionary (9th ed.). Saint Paul, Minnesota, US: West.

ISBN 978-0-314-19949-2 .

Grechenig, Kristoffel R.; Gelter, Martin (2008).

"The Transatlantic Divergence in Legal Thought: American Law and Economics vs. German Doctrinalism" .

Hastings International and Comparative Law Review .

31 (1) (published 3 March 2010): 295– 360. Archived from the original on 13 March 2020.

Hart, H. L. A.

(2012) [1964].

The Concept of Law (3rd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Murphy, Mark C. (2006).

Philosophy of law: the fundamentals . Malden, MA: Blackwell.

ISBN 9781405129466 .

OCLC 62281976 .

Further reading [ edit ] Austin, John (1831).

The Province of Jurisprudence Determined .

Cotterrell, R. (1995).

Law's Community: Legal Theory in Sociological Perspective . Oxford: Oxford University Press .

Cotterrell, R. (2003).

The Politics of Jurisprudence: A Critical Introduction to Legal Philosophy (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press .

Cotterrell, R. (2018).

Sociological Jurisprudence: Juristic Thought and Social Inquiry . New York/London: Routledge .

Freeman, M. D. A. (2014).

Lloyd's Introduction to Jurisprudence (9th ed.). London: Sweet & Maxwell .

Hartzler, H. Richard (1976).

Justice, Legal Systems, and Social Structure . Port Washington, NY: Kennikat Press.

Engle, Eric (July 2010).

Lex Naturalis, Ius Naturalis: Law as Positive Reasoning & Natural Rationality . Eric Engle.

ISBN 978-0-9807318-4-2 .

Hutchinson, Allan C., ed. (1989).

Critical Legal Studies . Totowa, NJ: Rowman & Littlefield.

Kempin Jr., Frederick G. (1963).

Legal History: Law and Social Change . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Llewellyn, Karl N. (1986).

Karl N. Llewellyn on Legal Realism . Birmingham, AL: Legal Classics Library. (Contains penetrating classic "The Bramble Bush" on nature of law).

Murphy, Cornelius F. (1977).

Introduction to Law, Legal Process, and Procedure . St. Paul, MN: West Publishing.

Rawls, John (1999).

A Theory of Justice , revised ed. Cambridge: Harvard University Press . (Philosophical treatment of justice).

Wacks, Raymond (2009).

Understanding Jurisprudence: An Introduction to Legal Theory Oxford University Press .

Washington, Ellis (2002).

The Inseparability of Law and Morality: Essays on Law, Race, Politics and Religion University Press of America .

Washington, Ellis (2013).

The Progressive Revolution, 2007–08 Writings-Vol. 1; 2009 Writings-Vol. 2, Liberal Fascism through the Ages University Press of America .

Zinn, Howard (1990).

Declarations of Independence: Cross-Examining American Ideology.

New York: Harper Collins Publishers .

Zippelius, Reinhold (2011).

Rechtsphilosophie , 6th ed. Munich: C.H. Beck .

ISBN 978-3-406-61191-9 Zippelius, Reinhold (2012).

Das Wesen des Rechts (The Concept of Law), an introduction to Legal Theory, 6th ed., Stuttgart: W. Kohlhammer .

ISBN 978-3-17-022355-4 Zippelius, Reinhold (2008).

Introduction to German Legal Methods (Juristische Methodenlehre), translated from the tenth German Edition by Kirk W. Junker, P. Matthew Roy. Durham: Carolina Academic Press .

Heinze, Eric , The Concept of Injustice (Routledge, 2013) Pillai, P. S. A. (2016).

Jurisprudence and Legal Theory , 3rd Edition, Reprinted 2016: Eastern Book Company.

ISBN 978-93-5145-326-0 External links [ edit ] Look up jurisprudence in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

LII Law about ... Jurisprudence .

The Roman Law Library, incl.

Responsa prudentium by Professor Yves Lassard and Alexandr Koptev.

Evgeny Pashukanis - General Theory of Law and Marxism .

Internet Encyclopedia: Philosophy of Law .

The Opticon: Online Repository of Materials covering Spectrum of U.S. Jurisprudence .

Bibliography on the Philosophy of Law. Peace Palace Library v t e Jurisprudence Legal theory Constitutionalism Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Brożek Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Maistre Marx Montesquieu Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Plato Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Waldron Walzer Weber Works Laws (c. 355 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1270) The Spirit of Law (1748) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Pure Theory of Law (1934) The Concept of Law (1961) Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980) Law's Empire (1986) Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Constitutional amendment Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Judicial reform Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes Links to related articles v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline v t e Social sciences Outline History Index Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural social physical Economics microeconomics macroeconomics econometrics mathematical Geography physical human technical integrated History cultural auxiliary sciences economic human military political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems public law private law Linguistics semiotics Political science international relations comparative philosophy public policy public administration Psychology abnormal cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Administration business public Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Criminology Critical animal studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental social science studies Food studies Gender studies Global studies Historical sociology History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Linguistics Management Media studies Philosophies science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Political sociology Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Quantum social science Social work Vegan studies List List of social science journals Other categorizations Behavioural sciences Geisteswissenschaft Human science Humanities Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Latvia Korea Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jurisprudence&oldid=1305520521 " Categories : Jurisprudence Academic disciplines Law Legal ethics Philosophy of law Roman law Social philosophy Social sciences Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from June 2018 All articles that may contain original research Articles needing additional references from June 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from July 2020 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 14:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jurisprudence 86 languages Add topic

