Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Forms of relation and interaction 3 See also Toggle See also subsection 3.1 Related disciplines 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Social relation 35 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Català Deutsch Эрзянь Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Lietuvių Македонски Bahasa Melayu Монгол 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Social interaction ) Any interpersonal relationship between two or more conspecifics between/within groups A social relation is the fundamental unit of analysis within the social sciences , and describes any voluntary or involuntary interpersonal relationship between two or more conspecifics within and/or between groups.

[ 1 ] The group can be a language or kinship group, a social institution or organization, an economic class, a nation, or gender. Social relations are derived from human behavioral ecology , [ 2 ] [ 3 ] and, as an aggregate, form a coherent social structure whose constituent parts are best understood relative to each other and to the social ecosystem as a whole .

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] Early inquiries into the nature of social relations featured in the work of sociologists such as Max Weber in his theory of social action , where social relationships composed of both positive (affiliative) and negative (agonistic) interactions represented opposing effects.

[ 5 ] Categorizing social interactions enables observational and other social research, such as Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft ( lit.

' community and society ' ), collective consciousness, etc.

Ancient works which include manuals of good practice in social relations include the text of Pseudo-Phocylides , 175–227, Josephus ' polemical work Against Apion , 198–210, and the deutero-canonical Jewish Book of Sirach or Ecclesiasticus , 7:18–36 .

[ 6 ] More recent research on social behaviour has demonstrated that newborn infants tend to instinctually gravitate towards prosocial behaviour.

[ 7 ] As obligate social apes, humans are born highly altricial , and require an extended period of post-natal development for cultural transmission of social organization, language, and moral frameworks. In linguistic and anthropological frameworks, this is reflected in a culture's kinship terminology , with the default mother-child relation emerging as part of the embryological process.

Forms of relation and interaction [ edit ] According to Piotr Sztompka , forms of relation and interaction in sociology and anthropology may be described as follows: first and most basic are animal-like behaviors , i.e. various physical movements of the body. Then there are actions —movements with a meaning and purpose. Then there are social behaviors , or social actions, which address (directly or indirectly) other people, which solicit a response from another agent.

Next are social contacts , a pair of social actions, which form the beginning of social interactions which metadata is a big contribution.Symbols define social relationships. Without symbols, our social life would be no more sophisticated than that of animals. For example, without symbols, people would have no aunts or uncles, employers or teachers—or even brothers and sisters. In sum, symbolic interactionists analyze how social life depends on the ways people define themselves and others. They study face-to-face interaction , examining how people make sense of life and how they determine their relationships.

Sociological hierarchy [ 8 ] Physical movement Meaning Directed towards others Await response Unique/rare interaction Interactions Accidental, not planned, but repeated interaction Regular Interactions described by law, custom, or tradition A scheme of social interactions Behavior Yes Action Yes Maybe Social behavior Yes No Yes Social action Yes Yes Yes No Social contact Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Social interaction Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Repeated interaction Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Regular interaction Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Regulated interaction Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Social relation Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No See also [ edit ] Society portal Affectional action Communicative action Dramaturgical action Instrumental and value-rational action Interdependence Interpersonal relationship Relations of production Social isolation Social movement Social multiplier effect Social robot Symbolic interactionism Traditional action Related disciplines [ edit ] Behavioral ecology Behavioral sciences Engaged theory Social ecology Social philosophy Social psychology References [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Social relation .

^ Cash, Elizabeth; Toney-Butler, Tammy J. (2024), "Social Relations" , StatPearls , Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing, PMID 28613794 , retrieved 2024-12-23 ^ van Schaik CP. 1989. The ecology of social relationships amongst female primates. In Comparative socioecology: the behavioural ecology of humans and other mammals (eds Standen V, Foley R), pp. 195–218. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Scientific.

^ Hinde, R. A. (1976).

"Interactions, Relationships and Social Structure" .

Man .

11 (1): 1– 17.

doi : 10.2307/2800384 .

JSTOR 2800384 .

^ Zahle, Julie (2021), "Methodological Holism in the Social Sciences" , in Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2021 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2024-12-23 ^ Wey, Tina W.; Jordán, Ferenc; Blumstein, Daniel T. (2019). "Transitivity and structural balance in marmot social networks".

Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology .

73 (6): 88.

Bibcode : 2019BEcoS..73...88W .

doi : 10.1007/s00265-019-2699-3 .

S2CID 169035896 .

^ Collins, J. J.

, 44. Ecclesiasticus, or The Wisdom of Jesus Son of Sirach , in Barton, J. and Muddiman, J. (2001), The Oxford Bible Commentary , p. 701 ^ Hughes, Claire; Leekam, Sue (November 2004). "What are the Links Between Theory of Mind and Social Relations? Review, Reflections and New Directions for Studies of Typical and Atypical Development".

Social Development .

13 (4): 590– 619.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9507.2004.00285.x .

S2CID 145630188 .

^ Sztompka, Piotr . 2002.

Socjologia, Znak .

ISBN 83-240-0218-9 . p. 107.

Bibliography [ edit ] Azarian, Reza. 2010. "Social Ties: Elements of a Substantive Conceptualisation".

Acta Sociologica 53(4):323–38.

Piotr Sztompka , Socjologia, Znak, 2002, ISBN 83-240-0218-9 Weber, Max . "The Nature of Social Action". In Weber: Selections in Translation , edited by W. G. Runciman . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . 1991.

Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Social_relation&oldid=1301335477 " Categories : Community building Interpersonal relationships Social sciences Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 07:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Social relation 35 languages Add topic

