Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Planning 1.2 Construction 2 Facilities 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard Science Center 3 languages فارسی Français 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′35″N 71°07′00″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3764°N 71.1166°W ﻿ / 42.3764; -71.1166 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Building on the Harvard University campus Harvard Science Center at Harvard University seen from the southwest with roof house astronomical optical telescopes visible The Harvard University Science Center is Harvard University 's main classroom and laboratory building for undergraduate science and mathematics, in addition to housing numerous other facilities and services. 
Located just north of Harvard Yard , the Science Center was built in 1972 [ 1 ] and opened in 1973 [ 2 ] [ 3 ] after a design by Josep Lluís Sert , who was then dean of the Harvard Graduate School of Design .

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] Planning [ edit ] The building sits astride a major pedestrian passage between Harvard Yard and the northern parts of campus Harvard had been interested in building an undergraduate science center in the 1950s and 1960s. However, in the midst of an economic decline, funding could not be found. No concrete plans were made until in 1968, Edwin Land , inventor of the Polaroid "Land" camera , made a $12.5 million donation to construct a science center specifically for undergraduates.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Opponents of the plan feared that funding would be insufficient to complete the project, and that the building's maintenance costs would be unreasonably high.

[ 6 ] The Biology Department also protested the move of its undergraduate-instruction facilities far from the department's main quarters. Professor George Wald argued that this would degrade the quality of instruction. There was also dissatisfaction with cancellation of plans at that time for a new biochemistry building.

[ 7 ] The plan called for demolition of Lawrence Hall, a laboratory and a living space built in 1848. By the time of the scheduled demolition, a commune of students and " street people " calling themselves the "Free University" had taken residence in the unused building.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The controversy was rendered moot when fire gutted the building a month later in May 1970.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] As part of the project, in 1966–68 the portion of Cambridge Street running along the north edge of Harvard Yard was depressed into a 4-lane motor vehicle underpass , thus allowing unhindered pedestrian movement between the Yard and Harvard facilities to the north, including the new Science Center. Architectural historian Bainbridge Bunting wrote that this was the "most important improvement in Cambridge since the construction of [what would later be called] Memorial Drive in the 1890s".

[ 1 ] Construction [ edit ] Harvard commissioned architects Sert, Jackson and Associates to design and build the facility.

Josep Lluis Sert , who had become Dean of the Harvard School of Design in 1953, had designed a number of other Harvard buildings, including Peabody Terrace , Holyoke Center (now the Smith Campus Center ), and the Harvard Divinity School's Center for the Study of World Religions . These buildings were part of a modernist movement that sought to break away from the Georgian and related styles used at Harvard for hundreds of years. Thus, the Science Center is largely steel and concrete, with abundant natural light.

[ 4 ] [ 7 ] Construction lasted from 1970 to 1972.

[ 7 ] From 2001 to 2004 a $22 million, 32,000-square-foot (3,000 m 2 ) renovation created space for the Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments and expanded other facilities.

[ 5 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] A room-sized historic electromechanical computer built in 1944, the Harvard Mark I , was displayed on the ground floor next to the central stairwell in the main lobby of the building (it has since been moved to the Science and Engineering Complex (SEC) in Allston, Massachusetts).

[ 14 ] Facilities [ edit ] The Science Center's plaza (foreground) as seen from the Harvard Science Center overlooking Harvard Yard Tanner Fountain in front of the Science Center The Science Center comprises nine stories, plus a basement and observatory floor. It houses the History of Science, the Mathematics, and the Statistics Departments. Other facilities include: [ 15 ] Cabot Science Library [ 3 ] Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments (CHSI), housing the History of Science Department's 20,000 objects, dating back to 1400 [ 16 ] 5 large lecture halls, seating between 132 and 500 [ 17 ] 15 smaller general-use classrooms [ 17 ] Teaching laboratories for chemistry, physics, biology, and other sciences Rooftop astronomical observatory with large optical telescopes Faculty and staff offices Secreted beneath the Science Center itself and its courtyard (and largely unknown those who work and study at Harvard) is a "gargantuan" chilled water plant, "a magnificent Piranesi -like interior with the volume of Boston's Symphony Hall " [ 1 ] providing cooling to many Harvard buildings from the Science Center northward.

[ 18 ] The building itself was first opened around the time of the 1973 oil crisis , and was plagued with huge energy costs, temperature control problems, and roof leaks for decades.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] The plaza between the Science Center and Harvard Yard , created by the depression of Cambridge Street and Broadway into a large tunnel, is used at various times for food trucks, roller skating, ice skating, and other activities such as markets and concerts. Tents are erected for special events such as Commencement.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] The Tanner Fountain, a sculptural installation of large boulders and landscaping, operates during warm weather.

Panorama of Harvard Science Center, viewed from the plaza in front References [ edit ] ^ a b c Bunting, Bainbridge; Henderson, Margaret (1985).

Harvard: An Architectural History . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. pp.

239– 243.

ISBN 978-0674372917 . Retrieved 13 November 2015 .

^ Stayner, Christian.

"Reshaping Harvard's Landscape" . The Crimson . Retrieved 13 November 2015 .

^ a b "History" .

Cabot Library . Harvard Library. Archived from the original on 22 June 2011 . Retrieved 13 November 2015 .

^ a b Goldberger, Paul.

"JOSEP L. SERT, 80, ARCHITECT, WAS HARVARD DEAN OF DESIGN" .

New York Times . Retrieved 13 November 2015 .

^ a b The Harvard Magazine.

"Reshaping the Science Center" .

Harvard Magazine . Harvard Magazine . Retrieved 13 November 2015 .

^ a b Shapiro, Peter.

"A $10 Million Science Center Headache" .

The Harvard Crimson . The Crimson . Retrieved 13 November 2015 .

^ a b c Nepom, Jerry.

"How (Not) To Build a Science Center" .

The Harvard Crimson . The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved 13 November 2015 .

^ Epps, Garrett.

"Policemen Enter Free U." The Crimson . The Crimson . Retrieved 30 December 2017 .

^ Johnson, Bruce.

"Free University Stays Without Authorization" .

The Crimson . The Crimson . Retrieved 30 December 2017 .

^ Epps, Garrett.

"Fire Guts Lawrence Hall; Wall Collapses on Firemen" .

The Harvard Crimson . The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved 13 November 2015 .

^ GoldHaber, Samuel.

"Cox: Memories of Fire" .

The Harvard Crimson . The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved 13 November 2015 .

^ Vascellaro, Jessica.

"Science Center to Undergo Renovation" .

The Harvard Crimson . The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved 13 November 2015 .

^ Meisel, Matthew.

"Science Center Work Nears Finish" .

The Harvard Crimson . The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved 13 November 2015 .

^ Powell, Alvin (23 July 2021).

"Harvard's Mark 1 finds its new home" .

Harvard Gazette . Retrieved 2023-08-17 .

^ "Science Center - Director's Office" . Harvard FAS . Retrieved 13 November 2015 .

^ "The Collection" .

Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments . Harvard University. Archived from the original on 6 September 2015 . Retrieved 13 November 2015 .

^ a b "Science Center Room Scheduling" . Harvard FAS . Retrieved 13 November 2015 .

^ Goldstein, Susan (January 12, 1978).

"The Great Chilled Water Bazaar Or Harvard's Energy Labyrinth" . The Crimson . Retrieved 13 November 2015 .

^ Gammill, Marion B. (October 9, 1993).

"`They Don't Look Like Harvard' " .

The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved 2022-03-17 .

^ "Heating and Cooling" (PDF) .

Science Center Building Operations . Harvard University FAS . Retrieved 2022-03-17 .

^ "Science Center Plaza Common Space Construction Underway" .

The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved 11 Nov 2017 .

^ "Harvard To Upgrade Science Center Plaza" .

The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved 11 Nov 2017 .

^ "Chicken and Rice Guys Truck May Return to Plaza in Spring" .

The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved 11 Nov 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Harvard University Science Center v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons 42°22′35″N 71°07′00″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3764°N 71.1166°W ﻿ / 42.3764; -71.1166 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard_Science_Center&oldid=1257913644 " Categories : Harvard University buildings University and college buildings completed in 1973 Modernist architecture in Massachusetts 1973 establishments in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 November 2024, at 06:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard Science Center 3 languages Add topic

