Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Classical interpretation 3 As a virtue 4 Piety and devotion 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Piety 36 languages العربية বাংলা Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Lingua Franca Nova Malagasy Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 پښتو Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Religious devotion or spirituality For other uses, see Piety (disambiguation) .

"Piety", Dulwich Picture Gallery Piety is a virtue which may include religious devotion or spirituality . A common element in most conceptions of piety is a duty of respect. In a religious context, piety may be expressed through pious activities or devotions, which may vary among countries and cultures.

Etymology [ edit ] The word piety comes from the Latin word pietas , the noun form of the adjective pius (which means "devout" or "dutiful"). English literature scholar Alan Jacobs has written about the origins and early meaning of the term: [ 1 ] It is not, in its origin, a Christian word. The Roman poet Virgil calls his hero pius Aeneas , says that he is a pietāte virum , but we might well mislead readers were we to say "pious Aeneas" or a "pious man." For his character is unmarked by the smarmy religiosity we typically associate with the word "pious." Aeneas is devoted to his mission, is faithful to the call of the gods on his life. He is willing to sacrifice his own interests to those greater interests, especially to the founding of the great city of Rome. He binds his will and his heart to that task. This is what it means to be pius .

Classical interpretation [ edit ] Pietas in traditional Latin usage expressed a complex, highly valued Roman virtue; a man with pietas respected his responsibilities to gods, country, parents, and kin.

[ 2 ] In its strictest sense it was the sort of love a son ought to have for his father.

Aeneas 's consistent epithet in Virgil and other Latin authors is pius , a term  which connotes reverence toward the gods and familial dutifulness. At the fall of Troy, Aeneas carries to safety his father, the lame Anchises , and the Lares and Penates , the statues of the household gods.

In addressing whether children have an obligation to provide support for their parents, Aquinas quotes, Cicero , "...piety gives both duty and homage": "duty" referring to service, and "homage" to reverence or honor." [ 3 ] Filial piety is central to Confucian ethics ; [ 4 ] reverence for parents is considered in Chinese ethics the prime virtue and the basis of all right human relations.

[ 5 ] [ better source needed ] As a virtue [ edit ] In Catholicism , Eastern Orthodoxy , Lutheranism , and Anglicanism , piety is one of the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit . "It engenders in the soul a filial respect for God, a generous love toward him, and an affectionate obedience that wants to do what he commands because it loves the one who commands." [ 6 ] Pope Gregory I , in demonstrating the interrelationship among the gifts, said "Through the fear of the Lord , we rise to piety, from piety then to knowledge..." [ 7 ] Aquinas spoke of piety in the context of one's parents and country, and given the obligation to accord each what is rightfully due them, related it to the cardinal virtue of justice. (By analogy, rendering to God what is due him, Aquinas identified as the virtue of religion, also related to justice.

[ 8 ] ) Professor Richard McBrien said piety "is a gift of the Holy Spirit by which we are motivated and enabled to be faithful and respectful to those—ultimately, God—who have had a positive, formative influence on our lives and to whom we owe a debt of gratitude," [ 9 ] and requires one to acknowledge, to the extent possible, the sources of those many blessings through words and gestures great and small.

Piety belongs to the virtue of Religion , which theologians put among the moral virtues, as a part of the cardinal virtue Justice , since by it one tenders to God what is due to him.

[ 10 ] The gift of piety perfects the virtue of justice, enabling the individual to fulfill his obligations to God and neighbor, and to do so willingly and joyfully. By inspiring a person with a tender and filial confidence in God, the gift of piety makes them joyfully embrace all that pertains to His service.

[ 11 ] John Calvin said, "I call ‘piety’ that reverence joined with love of God which the knowledge of his benefits induces. For until [people] recognize that they owe everything to God, that they are nourished by his fatherly care, that he is the Author of their every good, that they should seek nothing beyond him—they will never yield him willing service." [ 12 ] Bishop Pierre Whalon says that "Piety, therefore, is the pursuit of an ever-greater sense of being in the presence of God." [ 13 ] The Gift of Piety is synonymous with of filial trust in God.

[ 14 ] Through piety, a person shows reverence for God as a loving Father, and respect for others as children of God.

Pope John Paul II defined piety as "the gift of reverence for what comes from God," and related it to his earlier lectures on the Theology of the Body.

[ 15 ] In a General Audience in June 2014, Pope Francis said, "When the Holy Spirit helps us sense the presence of the Lord and all of his love for us, it warms our heart and drives us almost naturally to prayer and celebration." [ 16 ] "Piety", said Pope Francis , points up "our friendship with God." It is a gift that enables people to serve their neighbor "with gentleness and with a smile." [ 17 ] Piety and devotion [ edit ] Main article: Popular piety Expressions of piety vary according to country and local tradition. "Feast days", with their preparations for various religious celebrations and activities, have forged traditions peculiar to communities. Many pious exercises are part of the cultic patrimony of particular Churches or religious families.

[ 18 ] : §§7, 20 Devotions help incorporate faith into daily life.

[ 19 ] Popular piety "...manifests a thirst for God which only the simple and poor can know. It makes people capable of generosity and sacrifice even to the point of heroism, when it is a question of manifesting belief. It involves an acute awareness of profound attributes of God: fatherhood, providence, loving and constant presence. It engenders interior attitudes rarely observed to the same degree elsewhere: patience, the sense of the cross in daily life, detachment, openness to others, devotion. By reason of these aspects, we readily call it "popular piety," that is, religion of the people, rather than religiosity.

— Pope Paul VI [ 20 ] They are the manifestation of a theological life nourished by the working of the Holy Spirit who has been poured into our hearts (cf.

Romans 5:5 ).

— Pope Francis [ 21 ] While acknowledging that Anglican piety took the forms of more frequent communion and liturgical observances and customs, Bishop Ronald Williams spoke for increased reading of the Bible.

[ 22 ] [ importance?

] In the Methodist Church, works of piety are a means of grace. They can be personal, such as reading, prayer, and meditation; or communal, such as sharing in the sacraments or Bible study.

[ 23 ] For Presbyterians, piety refers to a whole realm of practices—such as worship, prayer, singing, and service—that help shape and guide the way one's reverence and love for God are expressed; and "the duty of the Christian to live a life of piety in accordance with God’s moral law".

[ 24 ] The veneration of sacred images belongs to the nature of Catholic piety, with the understanding that "the honour rendered to the image is directed to the person represented".

[ 18 ] : §18 See also [ edit ] Affective piety Plato 's dialogue Euthyphro , in which Socrates seeks a definition of piety Hasid (the Hebrew term) Islamic views on piety Pietism in the Lutheran Church References [ edit ] ^ Jacobs, Alan (2022-03-31).

"Recovering Piety" .

Comment Magazine . Retrieved 2023-04-23 .

^ Cicero , Nature of the Gods , I.116 Cicero , On Rhetorical Invention , II.66 ^ Aquinas, Thomas . "Secunda Secundae".

Summa Theologiae .

Question 101: Piety ; Article 2.

^ Chang, Wonsuk; Kalmanson, Leah (2010).

Confucianism in Context: Classic Philosophy and Contemporary Issues, East Asia and Beyond . SUNY Press. p.

68 .

ISBN 978-1-4384-3191-8 .

^ Willard, Dallas (2000).

"Christ-Centered Piety" .

Where Shall My Wond'ring Soul Begin?: The Landscape of Evangelical Piety and Thought . Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co. pp.

27– 36.

^ "Gift of Piety" .

Catholic Dictionary .

^ Pope Gregory I , Homiliae in Hiezechihelem Prophetam , II 7,7 ^ Pearson, Gregory (17 July 2009).

"The Life of Virtue—Piety" .

Godsdogz .

^ McBrien, Richard (21 December 2009).

"Piety refers to more than devotional practices" .

Catholic Courier .

^ Delany, Joseph (1911).

"Virtue of Religion" .

The Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 12. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Forget, Jacques (1910).

"Holy Ghost" .

The Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 7. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Calvin, John (1536).

Institutes of the Christian Religion . I.ii.1.

Cooper, Dale (January 18, 2011).

"Piety and Religion" .

The Banner . Christian Reformed Church in North America.

^ Whalon, Pierre W. (March 4, 2003).

"Piety" .

Anglicans Online .

^ "The Gift of Piety: Synonym of Filial Trust in God" .

Diocese of Orlando . Archived from the original on 2021-01-25.

^ Zeno, Katrina J. (June 5, 2019).

"Reverent Eros and the Gift of Piety" .

Diocese of Phoenix .

^ Glatz, Carol (June 4, 2014).

"Pope: Piety is embracing God, others with real love, not fake devotion" .

The Catholic Sun . Catholic News Service.

^ Gibson, David (February 13, 2020).

"Why the gift of piety is more than it may seem" .

Catholic Courier . Catholic News Service.

^ a b Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments (December 2001).

"Directory on popular piety and the Liturgy" . Vatican City.

^ "Devotions and popular piety bring faith into everyday life" .

CatholicPhilly . Catholic News Service. October 13, 2017.

^ Pope Paul VI (December 8, 1975), Evangelii nuntiandi , Libreria Editrice Vaticana, §48 ^ Pope Francis (November 24, 2013).

"Evangelii gaudium" . Libreria Editrice Vaticana. §125.

^ Williams, Ronald (1960).

"The Bible and Anglican Piety" (PDF) .

The Churchman : 91. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-08-04.

^ "The Wesleyan Means of Grace" .

United Methodist Church .

^ Pipa, Joseph.

"Presbyterian Theology" .

The Gospel Coalition .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Piety .

Shea, Mark (September 15, 2013).

"Saints Teach Us Piety by Their Example" .

National Catholic Register .

v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐d49c7db49‐wv8zw
Cached time: 20250814215427
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.686 seconds
Real time usage: 0.828 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3231/1000000
Revision size: 14250/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 94566/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3929/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 105498/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.466/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16779155/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  749.345      1 -total
 33.39%  250.170      1 Template:Reflist
 20.00%  149.896     16 Template:Cite_web
 16.32%  122.313     14 Template:Lang
 14.38%  107.790      2 Template:Navbox
 12.35%   92.563      1 Template:Virtues
  9.49%   71.112      1 Template:Short_description
  5.88%   44.040      3 Template:Quote
  5.50%   41.197      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.07%   37.979      1 Template:Better_source_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:49895:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215427 and revision id 1254988074. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Piety&oldid=1254988074 " Categories : Ethical principles Personality traits Religious practices Spirituality Virtue Hidden categories: Source attribution Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from September 2023 Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 2 November 2024, at 16:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Piety 36 languages Add topic

