Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Legacy 3 Other activities 4 Further reading 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Everyday Sexism Project 4 languages العربية বাংলা Dansk Simple English Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Website by Laura Bates Everyday Sexism Project Type of site User-generated content Available in At the discretion of the poster Owner Laura Bates Created by Laura Bates URL everydaysexism .com Commercial No Registration None, and posters may use a pseudonym Users Over 50,000 Launched 16 April 2012 ; 13 years ago ( 2012-04-16 ) Current status Online Content license Hosted by Blueshot Inc Some of the stories have been collated into a book - Everyday sexism by Laura Bates.

The Everyday Sexism Project is a website founded in 2012 by Laura Bates , a British feminist writer. Its aim is to document sexism from around the world.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] After graduating from Cambridge University with a degree in English Literature, Bates worked as a nanny and found that the young girls she looked after were already preoccupied with their body image.

[ 2 ] She set up the Everyday Sexism Project in April 2012 after finding it difficult to speak out about sexism. Everyday sexism can be defined as daily interactions between people that play into stereotypes of gender. These interactions can range from small infractions to large, unmissable demonstrations of sexism. It is common for incidents of everyday sexism to go unnoticed and unmentioned.

[ 3 ] Entries may be submitted directly to the site, or by email or tweet. Additionally, users have the option to insert their name into the entry or use a pseudonym if they prefer.

[ 4 ] The accounts of abuse are collated by a small group of volunteer researchers that operate on a rotational schedule. These researchers are coordinated by Emer O'Toole .

[ 1 ] Nearly a year after beginning the website, Bates reflected on the common response she had received. "Again and again, people told me sexism is no longer a problem – that women are equal now, more or less, and if you can’t take a joke or take a compliment, then you need to stop being so 'frigid' and get a sense of humor," she said in April 2013. "Even if I couldn’t solve the problem right away, I was determined that nobody should be able to tell us we couldn’t talk about it anymore." [ 5 ] At the time of the 2012 foundation of the Everyday Sexism website, Bates had "hoped to gather 100 women's stories," but a year after the launch she wrote that it had grown very rapidly.

[ 1 ] Today, this project has been made available to 25 countries around the world.

[ 6 ] The Financial Times journalist Lucy Kellaway said of herself, after encountering Bates and the project in the summer of 2014, the project affected her "in a way that the writings of Camille Paglia , Natasha Walter or Naomi Wolf never have. For the first time since the 1970s, I find myself cross on behalf of women, and rather inclined to take up cudgels. What has swayed me are not statistics or arguments but real stories of sexism. So far she has collected more than 60,000 of them, which sit there online, hard to ignore or dismiss." [ 7 ] Bates was named as one of Britain's most influential women in the BBC Woman's Hour Power List 2014.

[ 8 ] Legacy [ edit ] Two years after the launch of the Everyday Sexism Project in 2012, Laura Bates published a book that compiled entries received from those two years entitled Everyday Sexism.

The book uses a case-based format and its organization is structured on the common themes found within the entries.

[ 9 ] Some reviews of this book viewed the book as a strong backing for modern feminism.

[ 9 ] Some critics believe that this book offered no advancement of modern feminism. One feminist critic has been uncomplimentary. "Simply coughing up outrage into a blog will get us nowhere," wrote Germaine Greer in the New Statesman when she reviewed Bates' book in May 2014.

[ 10 ] Another critic, Rachel Cooke , said in her review of Everyday Sexism in April 2014, that this book, "is a wasted opportunity: little more than another repository for anger and frustration." [ 11 ] Even with mixed reception, Everyday Sexism was named one of the Bookseller's Top 10 Non-Fiction books of the year. It was also shortlisted for the Waterstone's Book of the year award.

[ 12 ] Other activities [ edit ] In January 2014, Everyday Sexism successfully campaigned for the removal of the mobile app Plastic Surgery & Plastic Doctor & Plastic Hospital Office for Barbie Version from the App Store and Google Play , for its promotion of a poor perspective on the concept of body image to those of a young age.

[ 13 ] The Everyday Sexism Project has advised British Transport Police on the training of their officers to respond to complaints of unwanted sexual behaviour as part of Project Guardian , an initiative to increase reporting of sexual offences on public transport in London.

[ 14 ] Bates said in April 2015: "The entries have been used to work on policy with ministers and members of parliament in multiple countries, to start conversations about consent in schools and universities, to tackle sexual harassment in businesses and workplaces and to help police forces raise the reporting and detection rates on sexual offences." [ 15 ] Further reading [ edit ] Bates, Laura (2014).

Everyday sexism . London: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 9781471131578 .

See also [ edit ] Everyday Lesbophobia , website about the negativity and discrimination faced by lesbians References [ edit ] ^ a b c Bates, Laura (16 April 2013).

"The Everyday Sexism Project: a year of shouting back" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 26 January 2016 .

^ "BBC Radio 4: Woman's Hour Power List 2014 - Top Ten revealed: 9. Laura Bates, campaigner" . BBC . Retrieved 28 July 2014 .

^ Bain, Jessica (10 August 2020).

"Taking action on everyday sexism" .

Champions Of Change Coalition . Retrieved 2 December 2024 .

^ "Everyday Sexism Project" . 23 September 2024 . Retrieved 2 December 2024 .

^ Klassen, Anna (9 April 2013).

"Everyday Sexism creator Laura Bates on helping women speak out" . The Daily Beast . Retrieved 26 January 2016 .

^ "Laura Bates: How Can We End Everyday Sexism?" .

NPR . 1 February 2019 . Retrieved 2 December 2024 .

^ Kellaway, Lucy (1 August 2014).

"Lucy Kellaway interviews Everyday Sexism Project founder Laura Bates" .

Financial Times . Retrieved 26 January 2016 .

^ "Woman's Hour Power List 2014 – Game Changers" . BBC Radio 4.

^ a b Haworth, Sacha (1 January 2015).

"Everyday Sexism" .

Journal of Family Planning and Reproductive Health Care .

41 (1): 37.

doi : 10.1136/jfprhc-2014-101134 .

ISSN 1471-1893 .

^ Greer, Germaine (14 May 2014).

"The failures of the new feminism" .

New Statesman . Retrieved 26 January 2016 .

^ Cooke, Rachel (14 April 2014).

"Everyday Sexism and the Vagenda review- everything you wanted to know about sexism, except how to fight it" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 2 December 2024 .

^ "Laura Bates - Literature" .

literature.britishcouncil.org . Retrieved 2 December 2024 .

^ Murray-Morris, Sophie (15 January 2014).

"Apple and Google pull plastic surgery apps for children following Twitter backlash" .

The Independent | News | Technology . Retrieved 15 January 2014 .

^ Bates, Laura (1 October 2013).

"Project Guardian: making public transport safer for women" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 17 September 2014 .

^ Driscoll, Brogan (8 May 2015).

"HuffPost 10: Laura Bates, Founder Of The Everyday Sexism Project" .

The Huffington Post . Retrieved 26 January 2016 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Everyday Sexism on Twitter Women Under Siege v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Everyday_Sexism_Project&oldid=1302990304 " Categories : Feminist websites Works about sexism Fourth-wave feminism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2014 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 14:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Everyday Sexism Project 4 languages Add topic

