Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 On the ground 3 In space Toggle In space subsection 3.1 Factors that contribute to sleep loss and fatigue 3.2 Factors that contribute to circadian desynchronization 4 Sleep loss, genetics, and space 5 Computer-based simulation information 6 See also 7 References 8 Sources 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Sleep in space 1 language עברית Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sleep in an unusual place An astronaut asleep in the microgravity of Earth orbit-continual free-fall around the Earth, inside the pressurized module Harmony node of the International Space Station in 2007 Sleeping in space is part of space medicine and mission planning, with impacts on the health, capabilities and morale of astronauts.

Human spaceflight often requires astronaut crews to endure long periods without rest. Studies have shown that lack of sleep can cause fatigue that leads to errors while performing critical tasks.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Also, individuals who are fatigued often cannot determine the degree of their impairment.

[ 4 ] Astronauts and ground crews frequently suffer from the effects of sleep deprivation and circadian rhythm disruption . Fatigue due to sleep loss, sleep shifting and work overload could cause performance errors that put space flight participants at risk of compromising mission objectives as well as the health and safety of those on board.

Mission Specialist Margaret Rhea Seddon , wearing a blindfold, sleeps in SLS-1 module ( STS-40 ) Description [ edit ] Sleeping in space requires that astronauts sleep in a crew cabin, a small room about the size of a shower stall. They lie in a sleeping bag which is strapped to the wall.

[ 5 ] Astronauts have reported having nightmares and dreams, and snoring while sleeping in space.

[ 6 ] Sleeping and crew accommodations need to be well-ventilated.

[ 7 ] In the early 21st century [ when?

] , crew on the ISS were said to average about six hours of sleep per day.

[ 8 ] On the ground [ edit ] Chronic sleep loss can impact performance similarly to total sleep loss and recent studies have shown that cognitive impairment after 17 hours of wakefulness is similar to impairment from an elevated blood alcohol level.

It has been suggested that work overload and circadian desynchronization may cause performance impairment. Those who perform shift work suffer from increased fatigue because the timing of their sleep/wake schedule is out of sync with natural daylight (see Shift work syndrome ).  They are more prone to auto and industrial accidents as well as a decreased quality of work and productivity on the job.

[ 9 ] Ground crews at NASA are also affected by slam shifting (sleep shifting) while supporting critical International Space Station operations during overnight shifts.

In space [ edit ] Flight engineer Nikolai Budarin , uses a computer in a sleep station in the Zvezda Service Module on the International Space Station.

Cosmonaut Yury Usachov in his sleeping compartment on Mir, called a Kayutka During the Apollo program , it was discovered that adequate sleep in the small volumes available in the command module and Lunar Module was most easily achieved if (1) there was minimum disruption to the pre-flight circadian rhythm of the crew members; (2) all crew members in the spacecraft slept at the same time; (3) crew members were able to doff their suits before sleeping; (4) work schedules were organized  – and revised as needed – to provide an undisturbed (radio quiet) 6-8 hour rest period during each 24-hour period; (5) in zero-g, loose restraints were provided to keep the crewmen from drifting; (6) on the lunar surface, a hammock or other form of bed was provided; (7) there was an adequate combination of cabin temperature and sleepwear for comfort; (8) the crew could dim instrument lights and either cover their eyes or exclude sunlight from the cabin; and (9) equipment such as pumps were adequately muffled.

[ 10 ] NASA management currently [ when?

] has limits in place to restrict the number of hours in which astronauts are to complete tasks and events.   This is known as the "Fitness for Duty Standards".  Space crews' current nominal number of work hours is 6.5 hours per day, and weekly work time should not exceed 48 hours.  NASA defines critical workload overload for a space flight crew as 10-hour work days for 3 days per work week, or more than 60 hours per week ( NASA STD-3001, Vol. 1 [ 11 ] ).  Astronauts have reported that periods of high-intensity workload can result in mental and physical fatigue.

[ 12 ] Studies from the medical and aviation industries have shown that increased and intense workloads combined with disturbed sleep and fatigue can lead to significant health issues and performance errors.

[ 13 ] Research suggests that astronauts' quality and quantity of sleep while in space is markedly reduced than while on Earth. The use of sleep-inducing medication could be indicative of poor sleep due to disturbances. Current space flight data shows that accuracy, response time and recall tasks are all affected by sleep loss, work overload, fatigue and circadian desynchronization.

Factors that contribute to sleep loss and fatigue [ edit ] The most common factors that can affect the length and quality of sleep while in space include: [ 9 ] noise physical discomfort voids disturbances caused by other crew members temperature An evidence gathering effort is currently underway to evaluate the impact of these individual, physiological and environmental factors on sleep and fatigue.  The effects of work-rest schedules, environmental conditions and flight rules and requirements on sleep, fatigue and performance are also being evaluated.

[ 9 ] Paul J. Weitz said that on Skylab he could not sleep vertically despite being weightless, so removed the metal frame in his sleeping bag and slept horizontally on it.

[ 14 ] Factors that contribute to circadian desynchronization [ edit ] Exposure to light is the largest contributor to circadian desynchronization on board the ISS.  Since the ISS orbits the Earth every 1.5 hours, the flight crew experiences 16 sunrises and sunsets per day.  Slam shifting (sleep shifting) is also a considerable external factor that causes circadian desynchronization in the current space flight environment.

[ 9 ] Other factors that may cause circadian desynchronization in space: [ 15 ] shift work extended work hours timeline changes slam shifting (sleep shifting) prolonged light of lunar day Mars sol on Earth Mars sol on Mars abnormal environmental cues (i.e.: unnatural light exposure) Sleep loss, genetics, and space [ edit ] Both acute and chronic partial sleep loss occur frequently in space flight due to operational demands and for physiological reasons not yet entirely understood. Some astronauts are affected more than others. Earth-based research has demonstrated that sleep loss poses risks to astronaut performance, and that there are large, highly reliable individual differences in the magnitude of cognitive performance, fatigue and sleepiness, and sleep homeostatic vulnerability to acute total sleep deprivation and to chronic sleep restriction in healthy adults. The stable, trait-like (phenotypic) inter-individual differences observed in response to sleep loss point to an underlying genetic component. Indeed, data suggest that common genetic variations ( polymorphisms ) involved in sleep-wake, circadian, and cognitive regulation may serve as markers for prediction of inter-individual differences in sleep homeostatic and neurobehavioral vulnerability to sleep restriction in healthy adults.  Identification of genetic predictors of differential vulnerability to sleep restriction will help identify astronauts most in need of fatigue countermeasures in space flight and inform medical standards for obtaining adequate sleep in space.

[ 16 ] Computer-based simulation information [ edit ] Biomathematical models are being developed to instantiate the biological dynamics of sleep need and circadian timing.  These models could predict astronaut performance relative to fatigue and circadian desynchronization.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Mir § Sleeping in space Effects of sleep deprivation in space Effects of sleep deprivation on cognitive performance Shift work sleep disorder Skylab 4 Sleep deprivation References [ edit ] ^ Harrison, Y; Horne, JA (Jun 1998). "Sleep loss impairs short and novel language tasks having a prefrontal focus".

Journal of Sleep Research .

7 (2): 95– 100.

doi : 10.1046/j.1365-2869.1998.00104.x .

PMID 9682180 .

S2CID 34980267 .

^ Durmer, JS; Dinges, DF (Mar 2005).

"Neurocognitive consequences of sleep deprivation" (PDF) .

Seminars in Neurology .

25 (1): 117– 29.

doi : 10.1055/s-2005-867080 .

PMC 3564638 .

PMID 15798944 .

^ Banks, S; Dinges, DF (15 August 2007).

"Behavioral and physiological consequences of sleep restriction" .

Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine .

3 (5): 519– 28.

doi : 10.5664/jcsm.26918 .

PMC 1978335 .

PMID 17803017 .

^ Whitmire, A.M.; Leveton, L.B; Barger, L.; Brainard, G.; Dinges, D.F.; Klerman, E.; Shea, C.

"Risk of Performance Errors due to Sleep Loss, Circadian Desynchronization, Fatigue, and Work Overload" (PDF) .

Human Health and Performance Risks of Space Exploration Missions: Evidence reviewed by the NASA Human Research Program . p. 88 . Retrieved 17 May 2012 .

^ "A Day in the Life Aboard the International Space Station" .

NASA . 2015-06-09.

^ "Sleeping in Space" .

NASA . Archived from the original on 5 June 2023.

^ "Daily life" . ESA. 19 July 2004 . Retrieved 28 October 2009 .

^ "Astronaut set to make history for longest stay in space" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on 2023-06-10.

^ a b c d Whitmire, A.M.; Leveton, L.B; Barger, L.; Brainard, G.; Dinges, D.F.; Klerman, E.; Shea, C.

"Risk of Performance Errors due to Sleep Loss, Circadian Desynchronization, Fatigue, and Work Overload" (PDF) .

Human Health and Performance Risks of Space Exploration Missions: Evidence reviewed by the NASA Human Research Program . pp.

91– 99 . Retrieved 17 May 2012 .

^ "Sleep" .

Working on the Moon: Lessons from Apollo . 2007 . Retrieved 10 December 2016 .

^ NASA SPACE FLIGHT HUMAN SYSTEM STANDARD - VOLUME 1: CREW HEALTH (Report). Vol. 1. 25 September 2009. Archived from the original on 6 March 2012.

^ Sheuring, RA; Jones, JA; Polk, JD; Gillis, DB; Schmid, J; Duncan, J; Davis, J; Novak, JD (2007).

The Apollo medical Operations Project: recommendations to improve crew health and performance for future exploration missions and lunar surface operations (PDF) (NASA/TM-2007-214755 ed.). Johnson Space Center, Houston: NASA . Retrieved 10 September 2013 .

^ Whitmire, A.M.; Leveton, L.B; Barger, L.; Brainard, G.; Dinges, D.F.; Klerman, E.; Shea, C.

"Risk of Performance Errors due to Sleep Loss, Circadian Desynchronization, Fatigue, and Work Overload" (PDF) .

Human Health and Performance Risks of Space Exploration Missions: Evidence reviewed by the NASA Human Research Program . pp.

88– 89 . Retrieved 17 May 2012 .

^ Schudel, Matt (October 24, 2017).

"Paul Weitz, astronaut who helped repair Skylab and commanded space shuttle, dies at 85" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on October 25, 2017 . Retrieved October 25, 2017 .

^ a b Whitmire, A.M.; Leveton, L.B; Barger, L.; Brainard, G.; Dinges, D.F.; Klerman, E.; Shea, C.

"Risk of Performance Errors due to Sleep Loss, Circadian Desynchronization, Fatigue, and Work Overload" (PDF) .

Human Health and Performance Risks of Space Exploration Missions: Evidence reviewed by the NASA Human Research Program . p. 103 . Retrieved 17 May 2012 .

^ Goel, Namni; Dinges, David F. (2012).

"Predicting risk in space: Genetic markers for differential vulnerability to sleep restriction" .

Acta Astronautica .

77 : 207– 213.

Bibcode : 2012AcAau..77..207G .

doi : 10.1016/j.actaastro.2012.04.002 .

PMC 3602842 .

PMID 23524958 .

This article incorporates public domain material from Human Health and Performance Risks of Space Exploration Missions (PDF) .

National Aeronautics and Space Administration .

(NASA SP-2009-3405).

Sources [ edit ] http://www.asc-csa.gc.ca/eng/astronauts/living-sleeping.asp http://science.howstuffworks.com/sleep-in-space.htm http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2013/02/what-its-like-for-astronauts-to-sleep-in-space/273146/ NASA.gov NASA.gov Further reading [ edit ] Griffith, Candice; Mahadevan, Sankaran (May 2006).

"Sleep Deprivation Effect on Human Performance: A Meta-Analysis Approach" (PDF) . Retrieved 30 May 2012 .

Maddox, W. Todd; Glass, Brian D.; Wolosin, Sasha M.; Savarie, Zachary R.; Bowen, Christopher; Matthews, Michael D.; Schnyer, David M. (2009).

"The Effects of Sleep Deprivation on Information-Integration Categorization Performance" .

Sleep .

32 (11): 1439– 48.

doi : 10.1093/sleep/32.11.1439 .

PMC 2768950 .

PMID 19928383 .

"Sleep and Performance Research Center" . Washington State University Spokane . Retrieved 30 May 2012 .

External links [ edit ] NASA - Sleeping in Space The Atlantic - What It's Like for Astronauts to Sleep in Space - February 2013 v t e ... in space Biology Human The human body Hygiene Locomotion Medicine Neuroscience Psychology Psychological and sociological effects Sex Sleep Non-human Animals Cats Cockroaches Dogs Frogs Fruit flies Mice Primates Tardigrades Tortoises Extraterrestrial life Microorganisms Plants Astrobotany Environment Climate Corrosion Debris Dust Magnetosphere Weather Weathering Society Advertising Alcohol Archaeology of Earth of items in space Art Burial Colonization Economy Mining Trade Ethics Exploration Food Law Military Music Religion Christmas Selfies Tourism Voting War Women Technology Human spaceflight Accidents Architecture Farming Food Carbonated drinks Toilets Writing Other technologies Logistics Manufacturing Mining Power Batteries Nuclear Solar for Earth for spacecraft Radar Telescopes Weapons Outer space portal v t e Space medicine Main areas Artificial gravity Astronautical hygiene Bioastronautics Neuroscience in space Space exposure Space food Space nursing Space weather Weightlessness Illness and injuries Asthenization Ebullism Illness and injuries during spaceflight Medical treatment during spaceflight Space adaptation syndrome Space and survival Spaceflight osteopenia Organizations Aerospace Medical Association National Space Biomedical Research Institute Rubicon Foundation Space Nursing Society Other topics Adverse health effects from lunar dust exposure Alcohol Cardiac rhythm problems during space flight Central nervous system effects from radiation exposure during spaceflight Effect of spaceflight on the human body Effects of sleep deprivation in space Epidemiology data for low-linear energy transfer radiation Sleep in space Health threat from cosmic rays Intervertebral disc damage and spaceflight List of microorganisms tested in outer space Psychological and sociological effects of spaceflight Radiobiology evidence for protons and HZE nuclei Reduced muscle mass, strength and performance in space Renal stone formation in space Spaceflight radiation carcinogenesis Team composition and cohesion in spaceflight missions Visual impairment due to intracranial pressure Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sleep_in_space&oldid=1301574810 " Categories : Sleep Space medicine Human spaceflight Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from December 2024 Vague or ambiguous time from October 2019 Wikipedia articles incorporating text from NASA This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 15:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sleep in space 1 language Add topic

