Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Related terms 2 Algorithms Toggle Algorithms subsection 2.1 Direct methods 2.2 Indirect methods 2.3 Additional note on the categorization 3 Affine motion estimation 4 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 4.1 Video coding 4.2 3D reconstruction 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Motion estimation 8 languages العربية Català Español Français 한국어 日本語 Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Motion vector ) Process used in video coding/compression Motion vectors that result from a movement into the z {\displaystyle z} -plane of the image, combined with a lateral movement to the lower-right. This is a visualization of the motion estimation performed in order to compress an MPEG movie.

In computer vision and image processing , motion estimation is the process of determining motion vectors that describe the transformation from one 2D image to another; usually from adjacent frames in a video sequence. It is an ill-posed problem as the motion happens in three dimensions (3D) but the images are a projection of the 3D scene onto a 2D plane. The motion vectors may relate to the whole image ( global motion estimation ) or specific parts, such as rectangular blocks, arbitrary shaped patches or even per pixel . The motion vectors may be represented by a translational model or many other models that can approximate the motion of a real video camera, such as rotation and translation in all three dimensions and zoom.

Related terms [ edit ] More often than not, the term motion estimation and the term optical flow are used interchangeably.

[ citation needed ] It is also related in concept to image registration and stereo correspondence .

[ 1 ] In fact all of these terms refer to the process of finding corresponding points between two images or video frames. The points that correspond to each other in two views (images or frames) of a real scene or object are "usually" the same point in that scene or on that object. Before we do motion estimation, we must define our measurement of correspondence, i.e., the matching metric, which is a measurement of how similar two image points are. There is no right or wrong here; the choice of matching metric is usually related to what the final estimated motion is used for as well as the optimisation strategy in the estimation process.

Each motion vector is used to represent a macroblock in a picture based on the position of this macroblock (or a similar one) in another picture, called the reference picture.

The H.264/MPEG-4 AVC standard defines motion vector as: motion vector: a two-dimensional vector used for inter prediction that provides an offset from the coordinates in the decoded picture to the coordinates in a reference picture.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Algorithms [ edit ] The methods for finding motion vectors can be categorised into pixel based methods ("direct") and feature based methods ("indirect"). A famous debate resulted in two papers from the opposing factions being produced to try to establish a conclusion.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Direct methods [ edit ] Block-matching algorithm Phase correlation and frequency domain methods Pixel recursive algorithms Optical flow Indirect methods [ edit ] Indirect methods use features, such as corner detection , and match corresponding features between frames, usually with a statistical function applied over a local or global area. The purpose of the statistical function is to remove matches that do not correspond to the actual motion.

Statistical functions that have been successfully used include RANSAC .

Additional note on the categorization [ edit ] It can be argued that almost all methods require some kind of definition of the matching criteria. The difference is only whether you summarise over a local image region first and then compare the summarisation (such as feature based methods),  or you compare each pixel first (such as squaring the difference) and then summarise over a local image region (block base motion and filter based motion). An emerging type of matching criteria summarises a local image region first for every pixel location (through some feature transform such as Laplacian transform), compares each summarised pixel and summarises over a local image region again.

[ 6 ] Some matching criteria have the ability to exclude points that do not actually correspond to each other albeit producing a good matching score, others do not have this ability, but they are still matching criteria.

Affine motion estimation [ edit ] Affine motion estimation is a technique used in computer vision and image processing to estimate the motion between two images or frames. It assumes that the motion can be modeled as an affine transformation (translation + rotation + zooming), which is a linear transformation followed by a translation.

Applications [ edit ] Video frames with motion interpolation Video coding [ edit ] Applying the motion vectors to an image to synthesize the transformation to the next image is called motion compensation .

[ 7 ] It is most easily applied to discrete cosine transform (DCT) based video coding standards , because the coding is performed in blocks.

[ 8 ] As a way of exploiting temporal redundancy, motion estimation and compensation are key parts of video compression . Almost all video coding standards use block-based motion estimation and compensation such as the MPEG series including the most recent HEVC .

3D reconstruction [ edit ] In simultaneous localization and mapping , a 3D model of a scene is reconstructed using images from a moving camera.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Moving object detection Graphics processing unit Vision processing unit Scale-invariant feature transform References [ edit ] ^ John X. Liu (2006).

Computer Vision and Robotics . Nova Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-59454-357-9 .

^ Latest working draft of H.264/MPEG-4 AVC Archived 2004-07-23 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved on 2008-02-29.

^ "Latest working draft of H.264/MPEG-4 AVC on hhi.fraunhofer.de" (PDF) .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Philip H.S. Torr and Andrew Zisserman: Feature Based Methods for Structure and Motion Estimation , ICCV Workshop on Vision Algorithms, pages 278-294, 1999 ^ Michal Irani and P. Anandan: About Direct Methods , ICCV Workshop on Vision Algorithms, pages 267-277, 1999.

^ Rui Xu, David Taubman & Aous Thabit Naman, ' Motion Estimation Based on Mutual Information and Adaptive Multi-scale Thresholding ', in IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 1095-1108, March 2016.

^ Borko Furht; Joshua Greenberg; Raymond Westwater (6 December 2012).

Motion Estimation Algorithms for Video Compression . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 978-1-4615-6241-2 .

^ Swartz, Charles S. (2005).

Understanding Digital Cinema: A Professional Handbook .

Taylor & Francis . p. 143.

ISBN 9780240806174 .

^ Kerl, Christian, Jürgen Sturm, and Daniel Cremers . " Dense visual SLAM for RGB-D cameras ." 2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems. IEEE, 2013.

v t e Computer vision Categories Datasets Digital geometry Commercial systems Feature detection Geometry Image sensor technology Learning Morphology Motion analysis Noise reduction techniques Recognition and categorization Research infrastructure Researchers Segmentation Software Technologies Computer stereo vision Motion capture Object recognition 3D object recognition Applications 3D reconstruction 3D reconstruction from multiple images 2D to 3D conversion Gaussian splatting Neural radiance field Shape from focus Simultaneous localization and mapping Structure from motion View synthesis Visual hull 4D reconstruction Free viewpoint television Volumetric capture 3D pose estimation Activity recognition Audio-visual speech recognition Automatic image annotation Automatic number-plate recognition Automated species identification Augmented reality Bioimage informatics Blob detection Computer-aided diagnosis Content-based image retrieval Reverse image search Eye tracking Face recognition Foreground detection Gesture recognition Image denoising Image restoration Landmark detection Medical image computing Object detection Moving object detection Small object detection Optical character recognition Pose tracking Remote sensing Robotic mapping Autonomous vehicles Video content analysis Video motion analysis Video surveillance Video tracking Main category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Motion_estimation&oldid=1232886730 " Categories : Video processing Motion (physics) Motion in computer vision Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019 This page was last edited on 6 July 2024, at 04:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Motion estimation 8 languages Add topic

