Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Philosophy 3 Influence 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Cratylus 35 languages Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek philosopher This article is about the Athenian philosopher. For Plato's dialogue, see Cratylus (dialogue) . For the deity with a similar name, see Kratos (mythology) .

Cratylus ( / ˈ k r æ t ɪ l ə s / KRAT -il-əs ; Ancient Greek : Κρατύλος , Kratylos ) was an ancient Athenian philosopher from the mid-late 5th century BC, known mostly through his portrayal in Plato 's dialogue Cratylus . He was a radical proponent of Heraclitean philosophy and influenced the young Plato.

Life [ edit ] Little is known of Cratylus beyond his status as a disciple of Heraclitus of Ephesus , Asia Minor . Modern biographers have not reached consensus on his approximate date of birth, arguing alternately for an age comparable either to Plato or Socrates .

[ 1 ] Cratylus is mentioned in Aristotle 's Metaphysics in a passage that seemingly implies he was an established and active philosopher in Athens during the mid-late 5th century, [ 1 ] and that Plato was briefly interested in his teachings prior to aligning with Socrates.

Philosophy [ edit ] In Cratylus' eponymous Platonic dialogue, the character of Socrates states Heraclitus' claim that one cannot step twice into the same stream.

[ 2 ] According to Aristotle, Cratylus went a step beyond his master's doctrine and proclaimed that it cannot even be done once.

[ 3 ] Influence [ edit ] The contemporary philosophy Cratylism is based on a reconstructed version of Cratylus' theories of flux and language as they appear in Plato's dialogue. It has been influential to Eastern thinkers, including Buddhist semioticians .

[ 4 ] The Australian poet, academic, and literary critic A. D. Hope published a book of essays on poetry in 1979 entitled The New Cratylus .

[ 5 ] Cratylus is mentioned twice in Emmanuel Levinas 's 1961 book, Totality and Infinity .

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] List of speakers in Plato's dialogues References [ edit ] ^ a b Debra Nails .

The People of Plato: A prosopography of Plato and other Socratics . Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 2002, p. 105 ^ Plato, Cratylus , 402a ^ Aristotle, Metaphysics , 4.5 1010a10-15 ^ Fabio Rambelli , A Buddhist Theory of Semiotics . London: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2013, p. 179 ^ The New Cratylus: Notes on the Craft of Poetry , Melbourne, Oxford University Press, 1979 ^ Levinas, Emmanuel (1969).

Totality and Infinity . Translated by Lingis. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania: Duquesne University Press. pp. 60, 92.

ISBN 978-0-8207-0245-2 .

v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany People Deutsche Biographie DDB Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cratylus&oldid=1306426322 " Categories : Ancient Greek philosophers of language Greek non-fiction writers Greek male non-fiction writers 5th-century BC Athenians 5th-century BC Greek philosophers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from June 2023 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 17:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cratylus 35 languages Add topic

