Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and works Toggle Life and works subsection 1.1 Attributed works 1.1.1 Treatises 1.1.2 Commentaries 1.2 Two Vasubandhus theory 2 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 2.1 Abhidharma 2.2 Critique of the self 2.3 Momentariness 2.4 Yogacara theories 2.5 Appearance only 2.6 Three natures and non-duality 2.7 Logic 3 Works 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Vasubandhu 42 languages العربية Asturianu বাংলা Български བོད་ཡིག Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Кыргызча Latina Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 4th/5th century Buddhist monk Vasubandhu Vasubandhu as a founding master of the Yogācāra school in a Chinese woodblock print collection "Portraits of the Buddha and Ancestral Masters" 佛祖正宗道影 (1880) by the Chinese monk Shouyi 守一.

Personal life Born c.

4/5th century CE Died c.

4/5th century CE Saketa Education Nalanda Religious life Religion Buddhism School Mahayana Part of a series on Mahāyāna Buddhism Teachings Bodhisattva Buddhahood Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Skillful Means Transcendent Wisdom Transcendent Virtues Emptiness Two truths Consciousness-only Three bodies Three vehicles Non-abiding Nirvana One Vehicle Bodhisattva Precepts Bodhisattva vow Bodhisattva stages Pure Lands Luminous mind Dharani Three Turnings Buddhas and Bodhisattvas Shakyamuni Amitabha Adi-Buddha Akshobhya Prajñāpāramitā Devī Bhaiṣajyaguru Vairocana Mañjuśrī Avalokiteśvara Vajrapāṇi Vajrasattva Maitreya Kṣitigarbha Ākāśagarbha Samantabhadra Tara Wrathful deities Mahayana sutras Prajñāpāramitā sūtras Lotus Sūtra Buddhāvataṃsaka Sūtra Mahāratnakūṭa Sūtra Mahāsaṃnipāta Sūtra Vimalakirtinirdeśa Pure Land Sutras Lalitavistara Sūtra Samādhirāja Sūtra Saṃdhinirmocana Sūtra Tathāgatagarbha sūtras Śrīmālādevī Sūtra Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra Śūraṅgama Samādhi Sūtra Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra Ghanavyūha sūtra Golden Light Sutra Tathāgataguhyaka Sūtra Kāraṇḍavyūha Sūtra Main traditions Mādhyamaka Yogācāra Tiantai Tendai Huayan Zen (Chan) Shingon Pure Land Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Nichiren Trúc Lâm Vajrayāna Newar Buddhism Tibetan Buddhism Dzogchen Bon Shugendō Humanistic Buddhism Key figures Nāgārjuna Aśvaghoṣa Āryadeva Lokakṣema Kumārajīva Asanga Vasubandhu Sthiramati Buddhapālita Dignāga Bhāvaviveka Dharmakīrti Candrakīrti Sengzhao Jizang Zhiyi Shandao Bodhidharma Huineng Xuanzang Fazang Amoghavajra Zhanran Chengguan Zongmi Saichō Kūkai Shāntideva Shāntarakshita Wohnyo Mazu Daoyi Linji Siming Zhili Jinul Dahui Zonggao Hongzhi Zhengjue Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Śaṅkaranandana Virūpa Ratnākaraśānti Abhayākaragupta Nāropā Atisha Sakya Pandita Dolpopa Rangjung Dorje Tsongkhapa Longchenpa Hakuin Hanshan Ouyi Zhuhong Taixu D. T. Suzuki Sheng-yen 14th Dalai Lama Thích Nhất Hạnh Regional traditions China Han Chinese Taiwan Japan Korea North Korea South Korea Vietnam Tibet Nepal Newar Bhutan Mongolia Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Malaysia Indonesia West v t e Vasubandhu ( traditional Chinese : 世親 ; ; pinyin : Shìqīn ;  Tibetan: དབྱིག་གཉེན་ Wylie : dbyig gnyen ; fl.

4th to 5th century CE) was an influential Indian Buddhist monk and scholar.

[ 1 ] He was a philosopher who wrote commentary on the Abhidharma , from the perspectives of the Sarvastivada and Sautrāntika schools. After his conversion to Mahayana Buddhism , along with his half- [ citation needed ] brother, Asanga , he was also one of the main founders of the Yogacara school.

Vasubandhu's Abhidharmakośakārikā ("Commentary on the Treasury of the Abhidharma") is widely used in Tibetan and East Asian Buddhism, as the major source for non-Mahayana Abhidharma philosophy. His philosophical verse works set forth the standard for the Indian Yogacara metaphysics of "appearance only" ( vijñapti-mātra ), which has been described as a form of " epistemological idealism ", phenomenology [ 2 ] and close to Immanuel Kant 's transcendental idealism .

[ 3 ] Apart from this, he wrote several commentaries, works on logic,  argumentation and devotional poetry.

Vasubandhu is one of the most influential thinkers in the Indian Buddhist philosophical tradition. Because of their association with Nalanda university, Vasubandhu and Asanga are amongst the so-called Seventeen Nalanda Masters.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In Jōdo Shinshū , he is considered the Second Patriarch ; in Chan Buddhism , he is the 21st Patriarch.

Life and works [ edit ] Different sources provide different places for Vasubandhu's birthplace.

Xuanzang states that Vasubandhu was born in Gandhara however Buton Rinchen Drup places Vasubandhu in Central India .

[ 1 ] Vasubandhu's name means "the Kinsman of Abundance." [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Tibetan Buddhism sees the two brothers as part of the six great Indian commentators called the "Six Ornaments".

[ 9 ] He was contemporaneous with Chandragupta I , father of Samudragupta . This information temporally places this Vasubandhu in the 4th century CE.

[ 10 ] The earliest biography of Vasubandhu was translated into Chinese by Paramärtha (499-569).

[ 11 ] Vasubandhu initially studied with the Buddhist Sarvāstivāda (also called Vaibhāṣika , who upheld the Mahavibhasa commentary) school which was dominant in Gandhara, and later moved to Kashmir to study with the heads of the orthodox Sarvastivada branch there.

[ 12 ] After returning home, he lectured on Abhidharma and composed the Abhidharmakośakārikā ( Verses on the Treasury of the Abhidharma ), a verse distillation of Sarvastivada Abhidharma teachings, which was an analysis of all factors of experience into its constituent dharmas (phenomenal events). However Vasubandhu had also begun to question Sarvāstivāda-Vaibhāṣika view for some time, and had studied with the Sautrāntika teacher, Manoratha. Thus, his auto-commentary to his Abhidharma verses sometimes criticize the Vaibhāṣika system from a Sautrāntika viewpoint.

[ 3 ] However, the work is not always critical of Vaibhāṣika, and in some cases, it also defends the orthodox Vaibhasika position.

[ 13 ] The Abhidharmakośa remains the main source for Abhidharma studies in both Tibetan Buddhism and East Asian Buddhism.

[ 14 ] Vasubandhu is later said to have converted to Mahayana beliefs under the influence of his brother Asanga , whereupon he composed a number of Yogacara treatises and Mahayana sutra commentaries. Some of his most influential Mahayana works have been the Twenty Verses on Consciousness Only ( Vimśatikāvijñaptimātratāsiddhi ), with its commentary ( Viṃśatikāvṛtti ), the Thirty Verses on Consciousness-only ( Triṃśikā-vijñaptimātratā ) and his Discourse on the Pure Land ( Jìngtǔ lùn 浄土論). The Thirty Verses is the basis for Xuanzang's Cheng Wei Shi Lun , one of the most important sources in East Asian Yogacara Buddhism . His Pure Land treatise was also very influential on East Asian Pure Land Buddhism .

In India, Vasubandhu became known as a major Mahayana master, scholar and debater. He is reported to have defeated Samkhya philosophers in debate in front of the Gupta king "Vikramaditya" (variously identified as Chandragupta II [ 15 ] or Skandagupta ) [ 16 ] at Ayodhya , who is said to have rewarded him with 300,000 pieces of gold.

[ 17 ] Vasubandhu used the money he made from royal patronage and debating victories to build Buddhist monasteries and hospitals.

As per traditional accounts, Vasubandhu died while visiting Ayodhya at the age of 100.

[ 18 ] Attributed works [ edit ] Vasubandhu was prolific author of Buddhist treatises and commentaries. A list of his key works includes: Treatises [ edit ] Viṃśatikā-vijñaptimātratāsiddhi (Twenty Verses Demonstrating Consciousness Only) Triṃśikā-vijñaptimātratā (Thirty Verses on Consciousness Only Pañcaskandhaprakaraṇa ( Explanation of the Five Aggregates ) Karmasiddhiprakarana ( A Treatise on Establishing Karma ) [ 19 ] Vyākhyāyukti ( Proper Mode of Exposition ), a text on Buddhist Hermeneutics , Vādavidhi ( Rules for Debate ), a text of formal epistemology ( pramana ) theory and debate *Mahāyāna śatadharmā-prakāśamukha śāstra ( Baifa mingmen lun 百法明門論 , Lucid Introduction to the One Hundred Dharmas , T 1614) Trisvabhāva-nirdeśa ( Exposition on the Three Natures ) - some scholars question the attribution of this text to Vasubandhu (or at least argue that this is a late work of his which differs in various respects from other works).

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Paramārthasaptati , a critique of Samkhya philosophy Commentaries [ edit ] Catuhśataka-śāstra (A commentary on Aryadeva's Four Hundred Verses ) Mahāyānasaṃgraha-bhāṣya (Commentary to the Summary of the Great Vehicle of Asanga ) Dharmadharmatāvibhāga-vṛtti (Commentary on Distinguishing Elements from Reality ) Madhyāntavibhāga-bhāṣya (Commentary on Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes ) Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra-bhāṣya (Commentary on the Ornament to the Great Vehicle Discourses ), this attribution has been questioned by some scholars.

[ 22 ] Amitayus sutropadeśa ( Instruction on the Sukhāvatīvyūha Sūtra ), also called " Discourse on the Pure Land " ( Jìngtǔ lùn 浄土論).

[ 23 ] Dasabhūmika-bhāsya (Commentary on the Ten Stages Sutra ) Commentary on the Aksayamatinirdesa-sutra Commentary on the Diamond Sutra Commentary on the Lotus Sutra [ 24 ] Two Vasubandhus theory [ edit ] Erich Frauwallner , a mid-20th-century Buddhologist, sought to distinguish two Vasubandhus, one the Yogācārin and the other a Sautrāntika, but this view has largely fallen from favour in part on the basis of the anonymous Abhidharma-dīpa , a critique of the Abhidharmakośakārikā which clearly identifies Vasubandhu as the sole author of both groups of writings.

[ 25 ] According to Dan Lusthaus , "Since the progression and development of his thought ... is so strikingly evident in these works, and the similarity of vocabulary and style of argument so apparent across the texts, the theory of Two Vasubandhus has little merit." [ 26 ] Scholarly consensus on this question has generally moved away from Frauwallner's "two-authors" position.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Vasubandhu: Wood, 186 cm height, about 1208, Kofukuji Temple , Nara , Japan Part of a series on Eastern philosophy China Confucianism Classical Confucius Mencius Xun Zi Dong Zhongshu Zheng Xuan Wang Yun Neo-Confucianism Han Yu Zhou Dunyi Zhang Zai Cheng Hao Cheng Yi Shao Yong Zhu Xi Lu Jiuyuan Wang Shouren Liu Zongzhou Li Zhi Wang Fuzhi Huang Zongxi Gu Yanwu Dai Zhen New Confucianism Kang Youwei Tan Sitong Liang Shuming Xiong Shili Feng Youlan Mou Zongsan Du Weiming Buddhism Han Buddhism Tientai Zhiyi Huayan school Fazang Guifeng Zongmi East Asian Mādhyamaka Jizang Kumārajīva Yogācāra Xuanzang Chinese Chan Bodhidharma Huineng Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Tibetan Buddhism Sakya Sakya Pandita Nyingma Longchenpa Gelug Tsongkhapa Four Tenets system Rangtong-Shentong Svatantrika-Prasaṅgika distinction Daoism Classical Laozi Zhuangzi Lie Yukou Neo-Daoism Wang Bi Ruan Ji Guo Xiang Ge Hong Cheng Xuanying Hundred Schools of Thought Legalism Guan Zhong Han Feizi Shang Yang Li Si Mohism Mozi Military and Strategy Sun Tzu Wu Qi Modern Hong Xiuquan Hong Rengan Yan Fu Zhang Taiyan Sun Yat-sen Lu Xun Dai Jitao Li Dazhao Chen Duxiu Ai Siqi Mao Zedong Liu Shaoqi Zhang Chunqiao Teng Wensheng Wang Huning Yi Junqing Zhao Tingyang Wang Hui Qin Hui Li Zehou India Āstika (orthodox) Vedic philosophy Agastya Aruni Ashtavakra Atri Vashistha Yajnavalkya Mimamsa Jaimini Vedanta Advaita Badarayana Gaudapada Adi Shankara Dvaita Madhvacharya Svābhāvika Bhedābheda Nimbarka Srinivasacharya Sri Vaishnavism Ramanuja Neo-Vedanta Vivekananda Aurobindo Samkhya Kapila Yoga Patanjali Nyaya Gotama Navya-Nyāya Gangesha Upadhyaya Vaisheshika Kanada Nāstika (heterodox) Ājīvika Charvaka Kashmir Shaivism Abhinavagupta Pratyabhijna Tantra Tamil Valluvam Valluvar Other Chanakya General topics Ahimsa Atomism Atman Ātman (Hinduism) Ātman (Buddhism) Ātman (Jainism) Artha Anekantavada Brahman Dharma Indian logic Karma Kama Maya Moksha Nondualism Samadhi Pramana Yoga Jainism Haribhadra Umaswati Buddhism The Buddha Traditions Madhyamika Nagarjuna Yogacara Vasubandhu Dharmakirti Indian logic Dignāga Topics Dukkha Anatta Anicca Maitrī Nirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Emptiness Japan Traditions Japanese Buddhism Japanese Zen Sōtō school Dogen Rinzai school Eisai Shingon Kukai Japanese Confucianism Tokugawa Mitsukuni Fujiwara Seika Hayashi Razan Nakae Tōju Itō Jinsai Ogyū Sorai Kokugaku Motoori Norinaga Modern Thought Statism Fukuzawa Yukichi Tokutomi Soho Kita Ikki Kyoto School Kitaro Nishida Hajime Tanabe Jun Tosaka Shūzō Kuki Tetsuro Watsuji Kiyoshi Miki Keiji Nishitani Shin'ichi Hisamatsu Masao Abe D. T. Suzuki liberalism and Marxism Masao Maruyama Kojin Karatani Hiroki Azuma Chizuko Ueno Korea Traditions Korean Buddhism Wonhyo Uisang Hwaeom Uicheon Cheontae Jinul Seon Korean Confucianism Persons Chŏng Tojŏn Sŏ Kyŏngdŏk Yi Ŏnjŏk Yi Hwang Yi I Yi Ik Pak Chiwŏn Chŏng Yagyong Kim Chŏnghŭi Choe Han-gi Topics Silhak , Seohak Donghak Choe Je-u Modern Thought Persons Jaegwon Kim Topics Minjung theology Juche Philosophy portal v t e Abhidharma [ edit ] Vasubandhu's Verses on the Treasury of the Abhidharma contains a description of all 75 dharmas (phenomenal events), and then outlines the entire Sarvastivada doctrine including "meditation practices, cosmology, theories of perception, causal theories, the causes and elimination of moral problems, the theory of rebirth, and the qualities of a Buddha." [ 29 ] The Treasury and its commentary also expound all kinds of arguments relating to the Sarvastivada Abhidharma and critique those arguments from a Sautantrika perspective in the commentary. Major arguments include an extensive critique of the Self ( Atman and Pudgala ) and a critique of the Sarvastivada theory of "the existence of the dharmas of the three time periods [past, present and future]". In the Treasury, Vasubadhu also argued against a Creator God ( Ishvara ) and against the Sarvastivada theory of avijñaptirūpa ("unperceived physicality" or "invisible physicality").

Critique of the self [ edit ] Vasubandhu's critique of the self is a defence of Buddhist Anatman doctrine, and also a critique of the Buddhist Personalist School and Hindu view of the soul. It is intended to show the unreality of the self or person as over and above the five skandhas (heaps, aggregates which make up an individual). Vasubandhu begins by outlining the soteriological motive for his argument, writing that any view which sees the self as having independent reality (e.g. the Hindu view) is not conducive to Nirvana .

Vasubandhu then evaluates the idea of the Self from epistemic grounds ( Pramana ). Vasubandhu states that what is real can only be known from perception (Pratyakṣa) or inference (Anumāṇa). Perception allows one to observe directly the objects of the six sense spheres . Inference allows one to infer the existence of sense organs . However, there is no such inference for a solid real Self apart from the stream of constantly changing sense perceptions and mental activity of the sense spheres.

[ 3 ] Vasubandhu also argues that because the Self is not causally efficient, it is mere convention (prajñapti) and a "conceptual construction" (parikalpita). This argument is mainly against the Buddhist Pudgalavada school who held a view of a 'person' that was dependent on the five aggregates , yet was also distinct, in order to account for the continuity of personality. Vasubandhu sees this as illogical: for him, the Self is made up of constantly changing sensory organs, sense impressions, ideas and mental processes. Any imagined unity of self-hood is a false projection.

Vasubandhu also uses this analysis of the stream of consciousness to attack non-Buddhist Hindu views of the Atman . Vasubandhu shows that the Hindu view of the Self as 'controller' is refuted by an analysis of the flux and disorder of mental events and the inability of the supposed Self to control our minds and thoughts in any way we would like. If the Self is truly an eternal un-caused agent, it should be unaffected by mere physical and mental causes, and it also seems difficult to explain how such a force existing independently outside of the mind could causally interact with it.

[ 3 ] Vasubandhu also answers several common objections to the Buddhist not-self view such as how karma works without a Self and what exactly undergoes rebirth. Vasubandhu points to the causal continuum of aggregates/processes which undergoes various changes leading to future karmic events and rebirth.

Momentariness [ edit ] During Vasubandhu's era, the philosophy of space and time was an important issue in Buddhist philosophy . The Sarvāstivādin tradition which Vasubandhu studied held the view of the existence of dharmas (phenomenal events) in all three times (past, present, future). This was said to be their defining theoretical position, hence their name Sarvāstivāda is Sanskrit for "theory of all exists". In contrast to this eternalist view, the Sautrāntika , a rival offshoot, held the doctrine of "extreme momentariness", a form of presentism (only the present moment exists).

In the Abhidharmakośakārikā , Vasubandhu puts forth the Sarvāstivādin theory, and then in his commentary (bhasya) he critiques this theory and argues for the 'momentariness' of the Sautrāntika. He also later wrote the Karma-siddhi-prakaraṇa ("Exposition Establishing Karma") which also expounded the momentariness view ( kṣanikavāda ). Vasubandhu's view here is that each dharma comes into existence only for a moment in which it discharges its causal efficacy and then self-destructs, the stream of experience is then a causal series of momentary dharmas. The issue of continuity and transference of karma is explained in the latter text by an exposition of the "storehouse consciousness" ( ālayavijñāna ), which stores karmic seeds ( bīja ) and survives rebirth.

Yogacara theories [ edit ] According to Dan Lusthaus, Vasubandhu's major ideas are: [ 12 ] "Whatever we are aware of, think about, experience, or conceptualize, occurs to us nowhere else than within consciousness." "External objects do not exist." "Karma is collective and consciousness is intersubjective." "All factors of experience (dharmas) can be catalogued and analyzed." "Buddhism is a method for purifying the stream of consciousness from 'contaminations' and 'defilements.'" "Each individual has eight types of consciousness, but Enlightenment (or Awakening) requires overturning their basis, such that consciousness (vijñaana) is 'turned' into unmediated cognition (jñaana)." Appearance only [ edit ] Vasubandhu's main Yogacara works (Viṃśatikā and Triṃśikā) put forth the theory of "vijñaptimātra" which has been rendered variously as 'representation-only', 'consciousness-only' and 'appearance-only'. While some scholars such as Lusthaus see Vasubandhu as expounding a phenomenology of experience, others (Sean Butler) see him as expounding some form of Idealism similar to Kant or George Berkeley .

[ 30 ] The Twenty verses begins by stating: In Mahayana philosophy...[reality is] viewed as being consciousness-only...Mind (citta), thought (manas), consciousness (chit), and perception (pratyaksa) are synonyms. The word "mind" (citta) includes mental states and mental activities in its meaning. The word "only" is intended to deny the existence of any external objects of consciousness. We recognize, of course, that "mental representations seem to be correlated with external (non-mental) objects; but this may be no different from situations in which people with vision disorders 'see' hairs, moons, and other things that are 'not there.'" [ 3 ] One of Vasubandhu's main arguments in the Twenty verses is the Dream argument , which he uses to show that it is possible for mental representations to appear to be restricted by space and time. He uses the example of mass hallucinations (in Buddhist hell ) to defend against those who would doubt that mental appearances can be shared. To counter the argument that mere mental events have no causal efficacy, he uses the example of a wet dream . Vasubandhu then turns to a mereological critique of physical theories, such as Buddhist atomism and Hindu Monism , showing that his appearance only view is much more parsimonious and rational.

[ 3 ] The Thirty verses also outlines the Yogacara theory of the Eight Consciousnesses and how each one can be overcome by the stages of enlightenment, turning consciousness (vijnana) into unmediated cognition (jnana) by cleansing the stream of consciousness from ‘contaminations' and ‘defilements.’ The Treatise on Buddha Nature was extremely influential in East Asian Buddhism by propounding the concept of tathagatagarbha (Buddha Nature).

Three natures and non-duality [ edit ] The Thirty verses and the "Three Natures Exposition" (Trisvabhavanirdesha) does not, like the Twenty verses, argue for appearance only, but assumes it and uses it to explain the nature of experience which is of "three natures" or "three modes". These are the fabricated nature (parikalpitasvabhāva), the dependent (paratantrasvabhāva) and the absolute (pariniṣpannasvabhāva). The fabricated nature is the world of everyday experience and mental appearances. Dependent nature is the causal process of the arising of the fabricated nature while the absolute nature is things as they are in themselves, with no subject object distinction.

According to Vasubandhu, the absolute, reality itself (dharmatā) is non-dual , and the dichotomy of perception into perceiver and perceived is actually a conceptual fabrication. For Vasubandhu, to say that something is non-dual is that it is both conceptually non-dual and perceptually non-dual.

[ 3 ] To say that "I" exist is to conceptually divide the causal flux of the world into self and other, a false construct. Just the same, to say that an observed object is separate from the observer is also to impute a false conception into the world as it really is - perception only. Vasubandhu uses the analogy of a magician who uses a magic spell (dependent nature, conceptual construction) to make a piece of wood (the absolute, non-duality) look like an elephant (fabricated nature, duality). The basic problem for living beings who suffer is that they are fooled by the illusion into thinking that it is real, that self and duality exists, true wisdom is seeing through this illusion.

[ 3 ] Logic [ edit ] Vasubandhu contributed to Buddhist logic and is held to have been the origin of formal logic in the Indian logico-epistemological tradition . He was particularly interested in formal logic to fortify his contributions to the traditions of dialectical contestability and debate . Anacker (2005: p. 31) holds that: A Method for Argumentation (Vāda-vidhi) is the only work on logic by Vasabandhu which has to any extent survived. It is the earliest of the treatises known to have been written by him on the subject. This is all the more interesting because Vāda-vidhi marks the dawn of Indian formal logic. The title, "Method for Argumentation", indicates that Vasabandhu's concern with logic was primarily motivated by the wish to mould formally flawless arguments, and is thus a result of his interest in philosophical debate.

[ 31 ] This text also paved the way for the later developments of Dignaga and Dharmakirti in the field of logic.

Works [ edit ] Abhidharma Kosha Bhashyam 4 vols, Vasubandhu, translated into English by Leo Pruden (based on Louis de La Vallée-Poussin ’s French translation), Asian Humanities Press, Berkeley, 1988-90.

L’Abhidharmakosa de Vasubandhu , traduit et annoté par Louis de La Vallée-Poussin , Paul Geuthner, Paris, 1923-1931 vol.1 vol.2 vol.3 vol.4 vol.5 vol.6 Internet Archive (PDF) Stefan Anacker, Seven Works of Vasubandhu Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1984, 1998 Ernst Steinkellner and Xuezhu Li (eds), Vasubandhu's Pañcaskandhaka (Wien, Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2008) (Sanskrit Texts from the Tibetan Autonomous Region, 4).

Dharmamitra, trans.; Vasubandhu's Treatise on the Bodhisattva Vow, Kalavinka Press 2009, ISBN 978-1-935413-09-7 Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Kritzer, Robert.

"Vasubandhu" .

Brill's Encyclopedia of Buddhism Online .

^ Lusthaus, Dan (2002).

Buddhist Phenomenology: A Philosophical Investigation of Yogācāra Philosophy and the Ch'eng Wei-shih lun . New York, NY: Routledge.

^ a b c d e f g h Gold, Jonathan C. (2015). " "Vasubandhu" ". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Niraj Kumar; George van Driem; Phunchok Stobdan (18 November 2020).

Himalayan Bridge . KW. pp.

253– 255.

ISBN 978-1-00-021549-6 .

^ "The Seventeen Pandits of Nalanda Monastery" .

Foundation for the Preservation of the Mahayana Tradition .

^ Tola, Fernando; Dragonetti, Carmen (2004).

Being as Consciousness: Yogācāra Philosophy of Buddhism . Motilal Banarsidass Publ. p. 55.

ISBN 978-81-208-1967-2 .

According to tradition Vasubandhu was born in Puruşapura, the capital of Gāndhāra (the modern Peshawar in Western Pakistan).

^ Chattopadhyaya, Debi Prasad; Embree, Lester E.; Mohanty, Jitendranath (1 January 1991).

Phenomenology and Indian Philosophy . SUNY Press. p. 262.

ISBN 978-0-7914-9882-8 .

The principal founders of this school, the brothers Asanga and Vasubandhu, were born in Puruṣapura, today Peshawar in Pakistan, and lived probably in the fourth century.

^ Anacker, Stefan (2015).

Seven Works of Vasubandhu, the Buddhist Psychological Doctor .

Motilal Banarsidass . p. 13.

ISBN 978-8120802032 .

^ "Six Ornaments - Rigpa Wiki" .

^ Dharma Fellowship (2005).

Yogacara Theory - Part One: Background History . Source: [1] Archived 2018-01-20 at the Wayback Machine (Accessed:  15 November 2007) ^ Takakusu, J., trans. (1904).

The Life of Vasubandhu by Paramartha, T'oung-pao 5, 269 - 296 ^ a b Lusthaus, Dan; Vasubandhu ^ Vasubandhu; Lodrö Sangpo; La Vallée Poussin, Louis de (2012).

Abhidharmakośa-Bhāṣya of Vasubandhu: the treasury of the Abhidharma and its (Auto) commentary.

Delhi, India. pp. 1191–1192. ISBN 978-81-208-3607-5.

^ Lamotte, Etienne (2001), Karmasiddhi Prakarana: The Treatise on Action by Vasubandhu , English translation by Leo M. Pruden, Asian Humanities Press ^ Goyala, Śrīrāma (1 August 1992).

Reappraising Gupta History: For S.R. Goyal . Aditya Prakashan. p. 123.

ISBN 978-81-85179-78-0 .

^ Bakker, Hans T. (1984).

Ayodhya . Institute of Indian Studies, University of Groningen. p. 31.

OCLC 769116023 .

^ Anacker, Stefan (2015).

Seven Works of Vasubandhu, the Buddhist Psychological Doctor .

Motilal Banarsidass . p. 21.

ISBN 978-8120802032 .

^ Tsong-kha-pa Blo-bzang-grags-pa; Tsoṅ-kha-pa (1991).

The Central Philosophy of Tibet: A Study and Translation of Jey Tsong Khapa's Essence of True Eloquence . Princeton University Press. pp. 44–.

ISBN 0-691-02067-1 .

^ Keenan, John, P., transl. (2017). Mahayana Demonstration on the Theme of Action, in: Three Short Treatises by Vasubandhu, Sengzhao, and Zongmi , Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai America, pp.5-46. ISBN 978-1-886439-66-5 ^ McNamara, Daniel (2011).

"On the Status of the Trisvabhāvanirdeśa in Contemporary Conceptions of Yogācāra Thought." ^ Kapstein, Matthew T. (2018).

"Who Wrote the Trisvabhāvanirdeśa? Reflections on an Enigmatic Text and Its Place in the History of Buddhist Philosophy" .

Journal of Indian Philosophy .

46 : 1– 30.

doi : 10.1007/s10781-017-9334-2 .

^ D’AMATO, M. "THREE NATURES, THREE STAGES: AN INTERPRETATION OF THE YOGĀCĀRA ‘TRISVABHĀVA’-THEORY." Journal of Indian Philosophy , vol. 33, no. 2, 2005, pp. 185–207.

JSTOR , http://www.jstor.org/stable/23497001. Accessed 16 Feb. 2024.

^ Matsumoto, David (2012).

"Jōdoron 浄土論: Discourse on the Pure Land" .

The Seven Patriarchs of Jodo-Shinshu Buddhism . Archived from the original on 8 February 2024 . Retrieved 22 February 2025 .

^ Abbot, Terry (2013).

The Commentary on the Lotus Sutra, in: Tsugunari Kubo; Terry Abbott; Masao Ichishima; David Wellington Chappell, Tiantai Lotus Texts . Berkeley, California: Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai America. pp.

83– 149.

ISBN 9781886439450 .

^ Jaini, Padmanabh (1958). "On the Theory of Two Vasubandhus".

Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies .

21 (1): 48– 53.

doi : 10.1017/s0041977x00063217 .

JSTOR 610489 .

S2CID 170974872 .

^ Dan Lusthaus , "What is and isn't Yogacara." .

^ Anacker, Stefan (2005).

Seven Works of Vasubandhu . Delhi: MLBD. pp.

7– 28.

^ Gold, Jonathan C. (22 April 2011).

"Vasubandhu" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2012 Edition) . Stanford University.

^ Lusthaus, Vasubandhu Archived 2017-10-14 at the Wayback Machine ^ Butler, Sean (2011) "Idealism in Yogācāra Buddhism," The Hilltop Review: Vol. 4: Iss. 1, Article 6.
Available at: http://scholarworks.wmich.edu/hilltopreview/vol4/iss1/6 ^ Anacker, Stefan (2005, rev.ed.).

Seven Works of Vasubandhu: The Buddhist Psychological Doctor.

Delhi, India: Motilal Banarsidass. (First published: 1984; Reprinted: 1986, 1994, 1998; Corrected: 2002; Revised: 2005), p.31 References [ edit ] David J. Kalupahana, The Principles of Buddhist Psychology , State University of New York Press, Albany, 1987, pp 173–192.

Francis H. Cook, Three Texts on Consciousness Only , Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research, Berkeley, 1999, pp 371–383 ("Thirty Verses on Consciousness Only") and pp 385–408 ("Twenty Verses on Consciousness Only") Erich Frauwallner, The Philosophy of Buddhism , Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 2010 [1956].

Li Rongxi, Albert A. Dalia (2002).

The Lives of Great Monks and Nuns , Berkeley CA: Numata Center for Translation and Research Thich Nhat Hanh Transformation at the Base (subtitle) Fifty Verses on the Nature of Consciousness , Parallax Press, Berkeley, 2001; inspired in part by Vasubandhu and his Twenty Verses and Thirty Verses texts Kochumuttom, Thomas (1982). A Buddhist Doctrine of Experience: A New Translation and Interpretation of the Works of Vasubandhu the Yogacarin. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Triṃśikā Vijñaptimātratā Gold, Jonathan C.

"Vasubandhu" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Vasubandhu: Entry at the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Multilingual edition of Triṃśikāvijñapti in the Bibliotheca Polyglotta Vasubandhu’s Treatise on the Three Natures (Trisvabhāvanirdeśa) – A Translation and Commentary by Jay Garfield v t e Topics in Buddhism Outline Glossary Index Foundations Four Noble Truths Three Jewels Buddha Dharma Sangha Noble Eightfold Path Nirvana Middle Way The Buddha Tathāgata Birthday Four sights Eight Great Events Great Renunciation Physical characteristics Life of Buddha in art Footprint Relics Iconography in Laos and Thailand Films Miracles Family Suddhodāna (father) Māyā (mother) Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother) Yaśodharā (wife) Rāhula (son) Ānanda (cousin) Devadatta (cousin) Bodhi tree Places where the Buddha stayed Buddha in world religions Bodhisattvas Avalokiteśvara Guanyin Mañjuśrī Mahāsthāmaprāpta Ākāśagarbha Kṣitigarbha Samantabhadra Vajrapāṇi Skanda Tārā Metteyya/Maitreya Disciples Kaundinya Assaji Sāriputta Mahamoggallāna Ānanda Mahākassapa Aṅgulimāla Anuruddha Mahākaccana Nanda Subhūti Puṇṇa Mantānīputta Upāli Mahapajapati Gotamī Khema Uppalavanna Asita Channa Yasa Key concepts Avidyā (Ignorance) Bardo Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Dhamma theory Dharma Enlightenment Five hindrances Indriya Karma Kleshas Mental factors Mindstream Parinirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Rebirth Saṃsāra Saṅkhāra Skandha Śūnyatā Taṇhā (Craving) Tathātā Ten Fetters Three marks of existence Anicca Dukkha Anattā Two truths doctrine Cosmology Ten spiritual realms Six Paths Deva realm Human realm Asura realm Hungry Ghost realm Animal realm Naraka Three planes of existence Branches Mahayana Zen Chinese Chan Japanese Zen Korean Seon Vietnamese Thiền Pure Land Tiantai Huayan Risshū Nichiren Madhyamaka Yogachara Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhism Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Shingon Dzogchen Theravada Southern Esoteric Buddhism Navayana Early Buddhist schools Pre-sectarian Buddhism Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna Southern, Eastern and Northern Buddhism Practices Bhavana Bodhipakkhiyādhammā Brahmavihara Mettā Karuṇā Mudita Upekkha Buddhābhiṣeka Dāna Devotion Deity yoga Dhyāna Faith Five Strengths Iddhipada Meditation Mantras Kammaṭṭhāna Recollection Smarana Anapanasati Samatha-vipassanā ( Vipassana movement ) Shikantaza Zazen Tukdam Koan Ganana Mandala Tonglen Tantra Tertön Terma Merit Mindfulness Mindful Yoga Satipatthana Nekkhamma Nianfo Pāramitā Paritta Puja Offerings Prostration Music Refuge Sādhu Satya Sacca Seven Factors of Enlightenment Sati Dhamma vicaya Pīti Passaddhi Śīla Five precepts Eight precepts Bodhisattva vow Pratimokṣa Threefold Training Śīla Samadhi Prajñā Vīrya Four Right Exertions Twenty-two vows of Ambedkar Yujia Yankou Shuilu Fahui Nirvana Bodhi Bodhisattva Buddhahood Pratyekabuddhayāna Four stages of awakening Sotāpanna Sakadagami Anāgāmi Arhat Monasticism Bhikkhu Bhikkhunī Śrāmaṇera Śrāmaṇerī Anagārika Ajahn Sayadaw Zen master Rōshi Lama Rinpoche Geshe Tulku Western tulku Kappiya Donchee Householder Upāsaka and Upāsikā Achar Śrāvaka Ten principal disciples Shaolin Monastery Major figures The Buddha Nagasena Aśvaghoṣa Nagarjuna Asanga Vasubandhu Kumārajīva Buddhaghosa Buddhapālita Dignāga Bodhidharma Zhiyi Emperor Wen of Sui Songtsen Gampo Xuanzang Shandao Padmasambhava Saraha Atiśa Naropa Karmapa Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Shamarpa Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Ajahn Mun B. R. Ambedkar Ajahn Chah Thích Nhất Hạnh Texts Early Buddhist texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana sutras Pali Canon Chinese Buddhist canon Tibetan Buddhist canon Dhammapada Sutra Vinaya Madhyamakālaṃkāra Abhidharmadīpa Countries Afghanistan Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bhutan Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Canada China Costa Rica Croatia Czech Republic Denmark England Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Korea Kyrgyzstan Laos Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Maldives Malaysia Mexico Middle East Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Scotland Senegal Singapore Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Tibet Ukraine United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela Vietnam Wales Zimbabwe History Timeline Ashoka Kanishka Buddhist councils History of Buddhism in India Decline of Buddhism in India Huichang persecution of Buddhism Greco-Buddhism Gandharan Buddhism Texts Menander I Buddhism and the Roman world Buddhism in the West Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Persecution of Buddhists In Afghanistan In Vietnam Rimé movement Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal Dalit Buddhist movement Chinese invasion of Tibet 1959 Tibetan uprising Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist modernism Vipassana movement 969 Movement Engaged Buddhism Women in Buddhism Philosophy Abhidharma Atomism Buddhology Creator Buddhism and democracy Economics Eight Consciousnesses Engaged Buddhism Eschatology Ethics Evolution Humanism Logic Reality Secular Buddhism Socialism The unanswerable questions Culture Architecture Temple Vihāra Kyaung Wat Ordination hall Stupa Pagoda Burmese pagoda Candi Dzong architecture List of Buddhist architecture in China Japanese Buddhist architecture Buddhist temples in Korea Thai temple art and architecture Tibetan Buddhist architecture Art Greco-Buddhist Budai Buddha in art Calendar Cuisine Funeral Holidays Vesak Uposatha Māgha Pūjā Asalha Puja Vassa Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Kasaya Mahabodhi Temple Mantra Om mani padme hum Mudra Music Pilgrimage Lumbini Maya Devi Temple Bodh Gaya Sarnath Kushinagar Poetry Prayer beads Hama yumi Prayer wheel Symbolism Dharmachakra Flag Bhavacakra Swastika Thangka Temple of the Tooth Vegetarianism Miscellaneous Abhijñā Amitābha Brahmā Dharma talk Hinayana Iddhi Kalpa Koliya Lineage Māra Siddhi Sacred languages Pāḷi Sanskrit Comparison Baháʼí Faith Christianity Influences Comparison East Asian religions Gnosticism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Psychology Science Theosophy Violence Western philosophy Lists Bodhisattvas Buddhas Buddhists American Korean Indian Suttas Sutras Temples Festivals Category Buddhism portal v t e Indian philosophy Topics Atheism Atomism Idealism Logic Monotheism Vedic philosophy Kama Artha Moksha Ancient Āstika Hindu : Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Shaiva Raseśvara Pashupata Shaivism Pāṇiniya Nāstika Ājīvika Ajñana Charvaka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist philosophy and Early Buddhist schools Śūnyatā Madhyamaka Yogachara Sautrāntika Svatantrika Medieval Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Sikh Philosophy Shaiva Pratyabhijna Pashupata Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Modern Integral yoga Gandhism Radical Humanism Progressive utilization theory Texts Abhinavabharati Arthashastra Bhagavad Gita Bhagavata Purana Brahma Sutra Buddhist texts Dharmashastra Hindu texts Jain Agamas Kamasutra Mimamsa Sutras All 108 texts Principal Nyāya Sūtras Nyayakusumanjali Panchadasi Samkhyapravachana Sutra Sangam texts Sarvadarsanasangraha Shiva Sutras Tarka-Sangraha Tattvacintāmaṇi Tirukkuṟaḷ Upanishads Minor Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Vedangas Vedas Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Yoga Vasistha More...

Philosophers Adi Shankara Abhinavagupta Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Maṇḍana Miśra Valluvar Avatsara Vāchaspati Misra Uddalaka Aruni Gautama Buddha Yājñavalkya Gārgī Vāchaknavī Buddhaghosa Patañjali Kanada Kapila Brihadratha Ikshvaku Jaimini Vyasa Chanakya Dharmakirti Akshapada Gotama Nagarjuna Padmasambhāva Vasubandhu Gaudapada Ramana Maharshi Vivekananda Dayananda Saraswati Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Raikva Sadananda Sakayanya Satyakama Jabala Madhvacharya Mahavira Guru Nanak More...

Concepts Abhava Abhasavada Abheda Adarsana Adrishta Advaita Aham Ahimsa Aishvarya Akrodha Aksara Anatta Ananta Anavastha Anupalabdhi Apauruṣheyā Artha Asiddhatva Asatkalpa Ātman Avyakta Bhrama Brahman Bhuman Bhumika Catuṣkoṭi Chaitanya Chidabhasa Cittabhumi Dāna Devatas Dharma Dhi Dravya Dhrti Ekagrata Guṇa Hitā Idam Ikshana Ishvaratva Jivatva Kama Karma Kasaya Kshetrajna Lakshana Matsya Nyaya Mithyatva Mokṣa Nididhyasana Nirvāṇa Nishkama Karma Niyama Padārtha Paramatman Paramananda Parameshashakti Parinama-vada Pradhana Prajna Prakṛti Pratibimbavada Pratītyasamutpāda Puruṣa Rājamaṇḍala Ṛta Sakshi Samadhi Saṃsāra Satya Satkaryavada Shabda Brahman Sphoṭa Sthiti Śūnyatā Sutram Svātantrya Iccha-mrityu Syādvāda Taijasa Tajjalan Tanmatra Tyāga Uparati Upekkhā Utsaha Vivartavada Viraj Yamas Yoga More...

v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Korea Sweden Poland Israel Belgium People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐r2qsd
Cached time: 20250817054655
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, vary‐revision, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.909 seconds
Real time usage: 1.104 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5247/1000000
Revision size: 31454/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 231339/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15208/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 156983/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.485/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18125449/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  808.770      1 -total
 22.59%  182.706      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 20.35%  164.603      1 Template:MahayanaBuddhism
 17.34%  140.218      1 Template:Reflist
 13.16%  106.418      1 Template:Infobox_religious_biography
 10.56%   85.395      5 Template:IAST
 10.54%   85.266      6 Template:Transliteration
 10.52%   85.056      1 Template:Wikisource
 10.20%   82.460      1 Template:Wikisource/outer_core
  9.83%   79.521      1 Template:Wikisource/inner_core Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:304972:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817054655 and revision id 1302749051. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vasubandhu&oldid=1302749051 " Categories : 4th-century births 4th-century deaths 4th-century Buddhist monks 4th-century Indian philosophers Atheist philosophers Idealists Indian scholars of Buddhism Mahayana Buddhists Buddhist logic Indian logicians Yogacara scholars Indian Buddhist monks Monks of Nalanda Jōdo Shin patriarchs People from Gandhara Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2025 Use Indian English from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Standard Tibetan-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 Wikisource templates with missing id This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 08:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vasubandhu 42 languages Add topic

