Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Life 3 Works 4 Legacy and assessment 5 References 6 Sources 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Nasir Khusraw 36 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Кыргызча मराठी مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Português Română Русский Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 11th-century Persian Isma'ili poet, scholar, philosopher, and missionary "Naser Khosrow" redirects here. For the village in Iran, see Naser Khosrow, Iran .

Nasir Khusraw Depiction by Abbas Rassam Arjangi , 1961 Title Proof ( ḥujja ) of Khurasan Personal life Born 1004 Qubadiyan , Khurasan , Ghaznavid Empire (present-day Tajikistan ) Died 1072–1088 Yumgan , Badakhshan (present-day Afghanistan ) Resting place Tomb of Nasir Khusraw Balkhi, Balkh , Afghanistan Notable work(s) Safarnama Diwan Religious life Religion Isma'ili Shi'a Islam Senior posting Teacher Al-Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Influenced by Al-Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani Influenced Isma'ilis of Badakhshan Part of a series on Islam Isma'ilism Concepts Quran Batiniyya Ta'wil Imamate Ẓāhir Bātin Nūr 'Aql ʿIlm Daʿwa Dāʿī Bāb Hujja Satr Taqiya Pīr Numerology Theology Reincarnation Titles Seven Pillars Walayah Purity Prayer Charity Fasting Pilgrimage Community Branches/sects Musta'li Tayyibi Dawoodi Bohra Progressive Hebtiahs Bohra Atba-i-Malak Bohra Badar Vakil Sulaymani Bohra Alavi Bohra Qutbi Bohra Hafizi Nizari Seveners Qarmatians Assassins Satpanth States Qarmatian state of Bahrayn Fatimid Caliphate Multan Sulayhid dynasty Zurayid dynasty Hamdanid dynasty Nizari Ismaili state People Hamdan Qarmat ibn Faraj ibn Ḥawshab ibn al-Fadl al-Jayshani ibn Mansur al-Yaman Abu Sa'id al-Jannabi Abu Tahir al-Jannabi Qadi Numan al-Nasafi al-Sijistani al-Kirmani al-Shirazi al-Naysaburi Nasir Khusraw Pamiris Queen Arwa al-Sulayhi Dhu'ayb ibn Musa Hasan-i Sabbah Hassan Ala Zikrihi's Salam Rashid ad-Din Sinan Pir Sadardin Aga Khans Khojas Dā'ī al-Mutlaqs Nasir al-Din Nasir Hunzai Centers Cairo Anjudan Nizārī strongholds Alamut Atashgah Gerdkuh Lambsar Masyaf Maymun-Diz Rudkhan Qalaat al-Madiq Other Palace of Queen Arwa Queen Arwa Mosque Nizārī Constitution Delegation Ginans Holy Du'a Jama'at Khana Qiyama Abbasid - Baghdad Manifesto House of Knowledge Women Early leaders Ali Hasan Husayn al-Sajjad al-Baqir Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq Ismāʿīl ibn Jaʿfar al-Mubārak Muhammad ibn Ismāʿīl ash-Shākir ʿAbad Allāh (al-Wāfī Ahmad) Ahmad (al-Taqī Muhammad) Ḥusayn (ar-Raḍī ʿAbd Allāh) ʿAbd Allāh al-Mahdī bi'l-Lāh al-Qāʾim al-Manṣūr Maʿad al-Muʿizz li-Dīn Allāh Nizār al-ʿAzīz biʾllāh, Manṣūr al-Ḥākim bi-Amr Allāh ʿAlī al-Ẓāhir li-iʿzāz Dīn Allāh Maʿad al-Mustanṣir bi'l-Lāh Nizār al-Muṣṭafā li-Dīn’il-Lāh / Aḥmad al-Mustāʿlī bi'l-Lāh Manṣūr al-Āmir bi-Aḥkām’il-Lāh ʿAbd al-Majīd al-Ḥāfiz li-Dīn Allāh / Abu'l-Qāsim al-Tayyib Incumbent leaders Nizārī Ismā'īlī Imām : Aga Khan V Musta'li Ismaili - Taiyabi Dā'ī al-Mutlaqs : Alavi Bohra : Haatim Zakiyuddin Dawoodi Bohra : Mufaddal Saifuddin Qutbi Bohra : Taher Fakhruddin Islam portal v t e Nasir Khusraw ( Persian : ناصرخسرو ; 1004 – between 1072–1088) was an Isma'ili poet, philosopher, traveler, and missionary ( da'i ) for the Isma'ili Fatimid Caliphate .

Despite being one of the most prominent Isma'ili philosophers and theologians of the Fatimids and the writer of many philosophical works intended for only the inner circle of the Isma'ili community, Nasir is best known to the general public as a poet and writer who ardently supported his native Persian tongue as an artistic and scientific language. All of Nasir's philosophical Isma'ili works are in Persian, a rarity in the Isma'ili literature of the Fatimids, which primarily used Arabic .

Nasir was a key figure in the spread of Isma'ilism in Central Asia . He is with great reverence called "Pir" or "Shah Sayyid Nasir" by the Isma'ili community of Badakhshan (split between Afghanistan and Tajikistan ) and their branches in northern Pakistan , who all consider him to be their founder.

Name [ edit ] Nasir Khusraw's full name was Abu Mu'in Hamid al-Din Nasir ibn Khusraw ibn Harith al-Qubadiyani al-Marvazi, which he would generally refer himself by in his prose philosophical works.

[ 1 ] In his book Safarnama , he mostly calls himself "Nasir", and in his poetry he mostly uses the pen-name "Hujjat", a title meaning "proof", which he had received by the Isma'ili missionary organisation in Cairo .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] In his poetry he also sometimes use the names of "Nasir" and "Khusraw", the latter being a Persian name, which according to historian Dr C. Alice Hunsberger "would certainly have been a point of great pride to this defender of Persian culture and language." [ 2 ] His name is also transliterated as Nasir-i Khusraw [ 3 ] and Naser-e Khosrow.

[ 4 ] Life [ edit ] Nasir is the subject of many tales, including a fake autobiography that bears his name and has been passed around between Isma'ilis and non-Isma'ilis for many centuries. The writings of Nasir that are still in existence offer insightful information about his life and philosophy. Yet, it appears that the majority of these manuscripts were censored to remove any references to Isma'ilism by antagonistic Sunni scribes. A native Persian, [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Nasir was from a family of government bureaucrats and landowners.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] He most likely adhered to the Twelver Shi'ism form of Islam before his conversion to Isma'ilism.

[ 3 ] He was born in 1004 in Qubadiyan , a neighborhood of the city of Balkh , which was part of the Marw province in the Khurasan region.

[ 8 ] The area was then controlled by the Ghaznavids , a culturally Persianised dynasty of Turkic slave origin.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Nasir supposedly started his career as a scribe before moving to the city of Marw to work as a financial administrator. He was allowed entry to the court at Balkh until in 1040, when Khurasan was conquered by the Seljuks .

[ 8 ] He retained his office under the Seljuks, [ 8 ] whose co-founder Chaghri Beg ruled Khurasan.

[ 12 ] Around the age of 41, Nasir underwent a tremendous and sudden change in his spirituality, which drastically altered the direction of his life. According to Nasir, the incident had the characteristics of a dream.

[ 8 ] He subsequently resigned from his office and converted to Isma'ilism.

[ 3 ] In December 1045, Nasir made the decision to embark on a prolonged journey with the ultimate goal of performing a pilgrimage to Mecca . In March 1046, along with his brother Abu Sa'id and an Indian attendant, he started his journey, which would first end after nearly seven years.

[ 8 ] From Khurasan, he travelled west, passing through northern and western Iran, Armenia , and Asia Minor . He then descended to Syria , Palestine , and then Arabia , where he performed his pilgrimage.

[ 8 ] [ 13 ] On August 1047, he went to Cairo in Egypt , [ 8 ] which served as the capital of the Isma'ili Fatimid Caliphate .

[ 3 ] The Fatimid Caliphate was the first and last significant Shi'i dominion until the emergence of the Safavid dynasty of Iran in 1501, who declared Twelver Shi'ism as its official religion.

[ 14 ] The majority of other governmental power bases were overwhelmingly Sunni, including the Ghaznavid and Seljuk rulers, who demonstrated their support for the Abbasid caliph in Baghdad by making determined efforts to put an end to Isma'ili activity, especially that of Isma'ili missionaries operating under the Fatimid caliph.

[ 15 ] At Cairo, Nasir was taught Isma'ili teachings, law, and administration by prominent scholars.

[ 14 ] He met al-Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi (died 1087), an Isma'ili scholar from Shiraz in southwestern Iran, who had also recently arrived to Cairo.

[ 3 ] [ 16 ] He became Nasir's teacher, instructing him in enigmatic Isma'ili concepts and philosophy.

[ 3 ] Nasir was raised to the position of dā‘ī "missionary" and appointed as the Hujjat-i Khorasan , though the hostility he encountered in the propagation of these new religious ideas after his return to Greater Khorasan in 1052 A.D. and Sunnite fanaticism compelled him at last to flee. After wandering from place to place, he found refuge in Yamgan (about 1060 A.D.) in the mountains of Badakhshan , where he spent as a hermit the last decades of his life, gathering a considerable number of devoted adherents, who have handed down his doctrines to succeeding generations.

[ 17 ] Nasir-i Khusraw explained that through revelation ( tanzil ), intellectual matters were transformed into a state that could be understood by humankind. Esoteric interpretation ( ta’wil ) is necessary to revert them to their original intellectual state. He also said that one must not be satisfied with the exoteric form but look for the person who can explain the original esoteric meaning to them. In saying this he alluded to the Imam of the Time .

[ 18 ] He died in Yamagan in present-day northern Afghanistan.

[ 19 ] He was buried in a small mausoleum on a small hill in the present-day village of Hadrat-i Sayyid (also called Hadrat-i Sa'id), on the eastern side of the Koksha Valley in present-day Afghanistan .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] According to an engraved inscription on the structure, it was renovated in 1697.

[ 20 ] Works [ edit ] Safarnama ( Persian : سفرنامه ) Safarnama (The Book of Travels) is his most famous work. He visited dozens of cities in about seven years (March 6, 1046 – October 23, 1052) and wrote comprehensively about them, including details about colleges, caravanserais, mosques, scientists, kings, the public, the population, the area of the cities, and, of course, his interesting memories. After 1000 years, his Safarnama is still readable for Persian-speaking people.

Diwan ( Persian : دیوان ) Among his other works, most of the lyrical poems in his Diwan were composed in his retirement, and their chief topics are an enthusiastic praise of Ali , his descendants, and al-Mustansir in particular, along with passionate outcries against Khorasan and its rulers, who had driven him from his home. It also explores his immense satisfaction with the quiet solitude of Yumgan, and his utter despondency again in seeing himself despised by his former associates and excluded from participation in the glorious contest of life. Scattered through all these alternating outbursts of hope and despair, there are lessons of morality, and solemn warnings against the tricks and perfidy of the world, the vanity of all earthly splendour and greatness, the folly and injustice of men, and the hypocrisy, frivolity and viciousness of fashionable society and princely courts in particular.

[ 17 ] Gushayish va Rahayish ( Persian : گشایش و رهایش ) Another work of Nasir Khusraw is the Persian philosophical work "Gushayish va Rahayish" which has been translated into English by F.M. Hunzai under the title: "Knowledge and Liberation". The work discusses creation, questions related to the soul, epistemology, and Ismaili Islamic doctrines. From a linguistic point of view, the work is an example of early philosophical writing in new Persian.

It is the same strain which runs, although in a somewhat lower key, through his two larger masnavis , the Rawshana-i-nama ( Persian : روشنایی‌نامه ) (or Book of Enlightenment, also known as Shish Fasl ), and the Sa'datnama (Book of Felicity). The former is divided into two sections: the first, of a metaphysical character, contains a sort of practical cosmography , chiefly based on Avicenna 's theories, but frequently intermixed both with the freer speculations of the well-known philosophical brotherhood of Basra , the Ikhwan al-Safa , and purely Shi'ite or Isma'ili ideas; the second, or ethical section of the poem, abounds in moral maxims and ingenious thoughts on man's good and bad qualities, on the necessity of shunning the company of fools and double-faced friends, on the deceptive allurements of the world and the secret snares of ambitious men craving for rank and wealth. It concludes with an imaginary vision of a beautiful work of spirits who have stripped off the fetters of earthly cares and sorrows and revel in the pure light of divine wisdom and love.

[ 17 ] If we compare this with a similar allegory in Nasir's Diwan , which culminates in the praise of Mustansir, we are fairly entitled to look upon it as a covert allusion to the eminent men who revealed to the poet in Cairo the secrets of the Isma'ili faith, and showed him what he considered the heavenly ladder to superior knowledge and spiritual bliss.

[ 17 ] A similar series of excellent teachings on practical wisdom and the blessings of a virtuous life, only of a more severe and uncompromising character, is contained in the Sa'datnama ; and, judging from the extreme bitterness of tone manifested in the reproaches of kings and emirs, we should be inclined to consider it a protest against the vile aspersions poured out upon Nasir's moral and religious attitude during those persecutions which drove him at last to Yumgan.

[ 17 ] Of all other works of the author, the Zaad-al-Musafirin (or Travelling Provisions of Pilgrims) and the Wajh-i Din (or The Face of Religion) are theoretical descriptions of his religious and philosophical principles; the rest of them can be dismissed as being probably just as apocryphal as Nasir's famous autobiography (found in several Persian tadhkiras or biographies of poets), a mere forgery of the most extravagant description, which is mainly responsible for the confusion in names and dates in older accounts of our author.

[ 17 ] Wajh-i din ( Persian : وجه دین ) Nasir Khusraw, explains the spiritual interpretation of the tradition of a six day creation of the physical universe. He writes about how the story of creation is a symbolic explanation of what happened when God created the universe. Interpreting it literally is something human beings do based on the limits of their intellects. In the scriptures, when it says that God began the work of creating the world on Sunday, completed it on Friday, and then rested on Saturday, it is not a literal account, rather a symbolic one.

[ 22 ] When the Prophets shared the story of a six-day creation of the physical universe, it was meant for the people to understand that God was saying that six prophets would come into this world and command people to work. When the seventh day came, God would not command in this manner, but would rather reward them for their hard work.

[ 22 ] Book on Mathematics ( Persian : غرایب الحساب و عجایب الحساب ) Nasir Khusraw wrote a book on mathematics which has now been lost. He states in his other work that he could: not find one single scholar throughout all of Khorasan and eastern lands like myself [who] could grapple with the solutions to these problems . But he felt it his responsibility to take the task for readers he would never see, 'those yet to come, in a time yet to come' Jamiʿ al hikmatayn ( Persian : جامع الحکمتین ) Legacy and assessment [ edit ] Despite being one of the most prominent Isma'ili philosophers and theologians of the Fatimid era and the writer of many philosophical works intended for only the inner circle of the Isma'ili community, Nasir is best known to the general public as a poet and writer who ardently supported Persian as an artistic and scientific language. All of Nasir's philosophical Isma'ili works are in Persian, a rarity in the Isma'ili literature of the Fatimids, which primarily used Arabic.

[ 3 ] Nasir was a key figure in the spread of Isma'ilism in Central Asia . He is with great reverence called "Pir" or "Shah Sayyid Nasir" by the Isma'ili community of Badakhshan (split between Afghanistan and Tajikistan ) and their branches in northern Pakistan , who all consider him to be their founder.

[ 23 ] Devotees that visit Nasir Khusraw's mausoleum also refer him by other names than "Nasir Khusraw", such as shāh (king), shāh-i buzurgvār (great king), mawlā (guardian), shīd-i Yumgān (sun of Yumgan), and uqāb-i Yumgān (eagle of Yumgan). The latter refers to one of Nasir Khusraw's poems, written to offer moral advice; The narrative, which is based on an ancient fable, describes an eagle circling in the sky "full of selfish pride" before being brought to the ground by an arrow with eagle feathers sewn into its fletch. The final lines of the poem convey a lesson, which has become a well-known saying amongst speakers of the Persian language; az māst ki bar māst ("what comes from us returns to us"), meaning that people possess the very characteristic that will determine both their success and failure.

[ 24 ] References [ edit ] ^ Hunsberger 2003 , pp. 3–4.

^ a b Hunsberger 2003 , p. 4.

^ a b c d e f g h de Smet 2021 .

^ Utas 2021 , p. 167.

^ Nanji, Azim (2012-04-24), "Nāṣir-i K̲h̲usraw" , Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition , Brill , retrieved 2023-09-03 , Nāṣir-i K̲h̲usraw, whose full name was Abū Muʿīn Nāṣir b. K̲h̲usraw b. Ḥārit̲h̲ al-Ḳubād̲h̲iyānī, Persian poet and prose writer, a noted traveller, and an Ismāʿīlī philosopher and dāʿī [q.v.].

^ "Nāṣir-i Khusraw" .

Digital PUL . 2020-01-25 . Retrieved 2023-09-03 .

Nāṣir-i Khusraw was a Persian scholar, poet, traveler and missionary for the Ismāʿīlī Shīʿī movement who is widely credited with the establishment of the Ismāʿīlī community in Badakhshan.

^ "Nasir Khusraw, The Ruby of Badakhshan: A Portrait of the Persian Poet, Traveller and Philosoph | Columbia Alumni Association" .

www.alumni.columbia.edu . Retrieved 2023-09-03 .

Nasir Khusraw, The Ruby of Badakhshan: A Portrait of the Persian Poet, Traveller and Philosoph ^ a b c d e f g h Daftary 2007 , p. 205.

^ Hunsberger 2003 , p. 3.

^ Bosworth 1988 , pp. 587–596.

^ Bosworth 2001 , pp. 578–583.

^ Bosworth 1990 , pp. 617–618.

^ Dabashi 2012 , p. 122.

^ a b Hunsberger 2003 , p. 6.

^ Hunsberger 2003 , p. 7.

^ Qutbuddin 2020 .

^ a b c d e f One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Ethé, Karl Hermann (1911). " Nāsir Khosrau ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 19 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 248.

^ Virani, Shafique (2019).

"Hierohistory in Qāḍī l-Nuʿmān's Foundation of Symbolic Interpretation (Asās al-Taʾwīl): The Birth of Jesus" .

Studies in Islamic Historiography : 147– 169.

doi : 10.1163/9789004415294_007 .

ISBN 9789004415294 .

S2CID 214047322 .

^ Ludwig W. Adamec (2009), Historical Dictionary of Islam , p.237. Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 0810861615 .

^ a b Daftary 2007 , p. 207.

^ Schadl 2009 , p. 64.

^ a b Virani, Shafique (January 2005).

"The Days of Creation in the Thought of Nasir Khusraw" .

Nasir Khusraw: Yesterday, Today, Tomorrow .

^ Daftary 2017 , p. 122.

^ Schadl 2009 , p. 77.

Sources [ edit ] Bosworth, C. E. (1988).

"Balḵ ii. From the Arab conquest to the Mongols." . In Yarshater, Ehsan (ed.).

Encyclopædia Iranica . Vol. III/6: Baḵtīārī tribe II–Banān. London and New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul. pp.

587– 596.

ISBN 978-0-71009-118-5 .

Bosworth, C. E. (1990).

"Čaḡrī Beg Dāwūd" . In Yarshater, Ehsan (ed.).

Encyclopædia Iranica . Vol. IV/6: Burial II–Calendars II. London and New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul. pp.

617– 618.

ISBN 978-0-71009-129-1 .

Bosworth, C. E. (2001).

"Ghaznavids" . In Yarshater, Ehsan (ed.).

Encyclopædia Iranica . Vol. X/6: Germany VI–Gindaros. London and New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul. pp.

578– 583.

ISBN 978-0-933273-55-9 .

Dabashi, Hamid (2012).

Shi'ism: A Religion of Protest . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674049451 .

Daftary, Farhad (2004).

Ismaili Literature: A Bibliography of Sources and Studies . London and New York: I.B. Tauris.

ISBN 978-0-8577-1386-5 .

Daftary, Farhad (2007).

The Ismāʿı̄lı̄s: Their History and Doctrines (Second ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-61636-2 .

Daftary, Farhad (2017).

Ismaili History and Intellectual Traditions . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-138-28810-2 .

Gould, Rebecca Ruth (2022).

The Persian Prison Poem . Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 978-1474484015 .

Hunsberger, Dr C. Alice (2003).

"Nasir Khusraw: A Portrait of The Persian Poet, Traveller and Philosopher" (PDF) .

The Institute of Ismaili Studies : 1– 14.

Mahamid, H. (2017). "Persecutions against Ismaʿili Missionaries in Central Asia: The Case of Nāser Khosrow".

Journal of Persianate Studies .

10 (1).

Brill : 57– 72.

doi : 10.1163/18747167-12341307 .

Qutbuddin, Tahera (2020).

"al-Muʾayyad al-Shīrāzī" . In Fleet, Kate; Krämer, Gudrun ; Matringe, Denis; Nawas, John; Rowson, Everett (eds.).

Encyclopaedia of Islam (3rd ed.). Brill Online.

ISSN 1873-9830 .

Schadl, Marcus (2009). "The Shrine of Nasir Khusraw: Imprisoned Deep in the Valley of Yumgan".

Muqarnas Online .

26 (1).

Brill : 63– 93.

doi : 10.1163/22118993_02601004 .

de Smet, Daniel (2021).

"Nāṣir-i Khusraw" . In Fleet, Kate; Krämer, Gudrun ; Matringe, Denis; Nawas, John; Rowson, Everett (eds.).

Encyclopaedia of Islam (3rd ed.). Brill Online.

ISSN 1873-9830 .

Utas, Bo (2021).

Persian Prose: A History of Persian Literature, Vol V . I.B. Tauris.

ISBN 978-1845119065 .

Further reading [ edit ] Peacock, A. C. S.

(2015).

The Great Seljuk Empire . Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 978-0-7486-3826-0 .

v t e Persian literature Old Behistun Inscription Old Persian inscriptions Ganjnameh Inscription of Xerxes the Great in Van Fortress Achaemenid inscription in the Kharg Island Middle Ayadgar-i Zariran Counsels of Adurbad-e Mahrspandan Dēnkard Book of Jamasp Book of Arda Viraf Karnamak-i Artaxshir-i Papakan Cube of Zoroaster Dana-i Menog Khrat Shabuhragan of Mani Shahrestanha-ye Eranshahr Bundahishn Menog-i Khrad Jamasp Namag Dadestan-i Denig Anthology of Zadspram Warshtmansr Zand-i Wahman yasn Drakht-i Asurig Shikand-gumanig Vizar Classical 800s Muhammad ibn Wasif 900s Rudaki Daqiqi Ferdowsi ( Shahnameh ) Abu Shakur Balkhi Abu Tahir Khosrovani Shahid Balkhi Bal'ami Rabia Balkhi Abusaeid Abolkheir (967–1049) Avicenna (980–1037) Unsuri Asjadi Kisai Marvazi Ayyuqi 1000s Bābā Tāher Nasir Khusraw (1004–1088) Al-Ghazali (1058–1111) Khwaja Abdullah Ansari (1006–1088) Asadi Tusi Qatran Tabrizi (1009–1072) Nizam al-Mulk (1018–1092) Masud Sa'd Salman (1046–1121) Omar Khayyam (1048–1131) Fakhruddin As'ad Gurgani Ahmad Ghazali Hujwiri Manuchehri Ayn-al-Quzat Hamadani (1098–1131) Uthman Mukhtari Abu-al-Faraj Runi Sanai Banu Goshasp Borzu-Nama Afdal al-Din Kashani Abu'l Hasan Mihyar al-Daylami Mu'izzi Mahsati Ganjavi 1100s Athir al-Din Akhsikati Iranshah Suzani Samarqandi Hassan Ghaznavi Faramarz Nama Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi (1155–1191) Adib Sabir Falaki Shirvani Am'aq Najm al-Din Razi Attar (1142– c.1220 ) Khaqani (1120–1190) Anvari (1126–1189) Faramarz-e Khodadad Nizami Ganjavi (1141–1209) Fakhr al-Din al-Razi (1149–1209) Kamal al-Din Esfahani Shams Tabrizi (d.1248) 1200s Abu Tahir Tarsusi Awhadi Maraghai Shams al-Din Qays Razi Sultan Walad Nasīr al-Dīn al-Tūsī Afdal al-Din Kashani Fakhr-al-Din Iraqi Mahmud Shabistari (1288–1320s) Abu'l Majd Tabrizi Amir Khusrau (1253–1325) Saadi ( Bustan / Golestān ) Bahram-e-Pazhdo Pur-Baha Jami Zartosht Bahram e Pazhdo Rumi Homam Tabrizi (1238–1314) Nozhat al-Majales Khwaju Kermani Badr Shirvani Zu'l-Fiqar Shirvani 1300s Ibn Yamin Shah Ni'matullah Wali Hafez Abu Ali Qalandar Fazlallah Astarabadi Nasimi Emad al-Din Faqih Kermani 1400s Ubayd Zakani Salman Savaji Hatefi Jami Kamal Khujandi Ahli Shirazi (1454–1535) Fuzuli (1483–1556) Ismail I (1487–1524) Baba Faghani 1500s Vahshi Bafqi (1523–1583) Mohtasham Kashani (1500–1588) 'Orfi Shirazi 1600s Taleb Amoli Saib Tabrizi (1607–1670) Asir-e Esfahani (c. 1620–1648) Kalim Kashani Hazin Lāhiji (1692–1766) Saba Kashani Abdul-Qādir Bēdil (1642–1720) Naw'i Khabushani Mohammad Qoli Salim Tehrani Rasa Salim Tehrani 1700s Hatef Esfahani Azar Bigdeli (1722–1781) Neshat Esfahani Abbas Foroughi Bastami (1798–1857) 1800s Yaghma Jandaqi (1782–1859) Mirza Ghalib (1797–1869) Zayn al-Abidin Shirvani (1779–1837) Reza-Qoli Khan Hedayat (1800–1871) Mirza Mohammad Taqi Sepehr (1801–1880) Qaani (1808–1854) Mahmud Khan Malek al-Sho'ara (1813–1893) Contemporary Poetry Iran Ahmadreza Ahmadi Mehdi Akhavan-Sales Hormoz Alipour Qeysar Aminpour Mohammad Reza Aslani Aref Qazvini Ahmad NikTalab Aminollah Rezaei Manouchehr Atashi Mahmoud Mosharraf Azad Tehrani Mohammad-Taqi Bahar Reza Baraheni Simin Behbahani Dehkhoda Hushang Ebtehaj Bijan Elahi Parviz Eslampour Parvin E'tesami Forugh Farrokhzad Hossein Monzavi Hushang Irani Iraj Mirza Bijan Jalali Siavash Kasraie Esmail Khoi Shams Langeroodi Mohammad Mokhtari Nosrat Rahmani Yadollah Royaee Tahereh Saffarzadeh Sohrab Sepehri Mohammad-Reza Shafiei Kadkani Mohammad-Hossein Shahriar Ahmad Shamlou Manouchehr Sheybani Nima Yooshij ( She'r-e Nimaa'i ) Fereydoon Moshiri Armenia Edward Haghverdian Afghanistan Nadia Anjuman Wasef Bakhtari Raziq Faani Khalilullah Khalili Youssof Kohzad Massoud Nawabi Abdul Ali Mustaghni Tajikistan Sadriddin Ayni Farzona Iskandar Khatloni Abolqasem Lahouti Gulrukhsor Safieva Loiq Sher-Ali Payrav Sulaymoni Mirzo Tursunzoda Satim Ulugzade Uzbekistan Asad Gulzoda Pakistan Muhammad Iqbal Novels Ali Mohammad Afghani Ghazaleh Alizadeh Bozorg Alavi Reza Amirkhani Mahshid Amirshahi Ghassem Hashemi Nezhad Reza Baraheni Simin Daneshvar Mahmoud Dowlatabadi Soudabeh Fazaeli Reza Ghassemi Mohammad Hanif (Iranian writer) Houshang Golshiri Aboutorab Khosravi Zeyn al-Abedin Maraghei Ahmad Mahmoud Shahriyar Mandanipour Abbas Maroufi Mansour Koushan Iraj Pezeshkzad Short stories Jalal Al-e-Ahmad Shamim Bahar Sadeq Chubak Abolhassan Etessami Javad Mojabi Simin Daneshvar Nader Ebrahimi Ebrahim Golestan Houshang Golshiri Sadegh Hedayat Mohammad-Ali Jamalzadeh Aboutorab Khosravi Mostafa Mastoor Jaafar Modarres-Sadeghi Houshang Moradi Kermani Bijan Najdi Shahrnush Parsipur Gholam-Hossein Sa'edi Bahram Sadeghi Goli Taraqqi Plays Reza Abdoh Mirza Fatali Akhundzadeh Mohsen Yalfani Bahram Beyzai Bahman Forsi Amir Reza Koohestani Alireza Koushk Jalali Gholam-Hossein Sa'edi Bijan Mofid Hengameh Mofid Abbas Nalbandian Akbar Radi Pari Saberi Mirza Aqa Tabrizi Mohammad Yaghoubi Screenplays Saeed Aghighi Mohammad Reza Aslani Rakhshan Bani-E'temad Bahram Beyzai Hajir Darioush Pouran Derakhshandeh Asghar Farhadi Bahman Farmanara Farrokh Ghaffari Behrouz Gharibpour Bahman Ghobadi Fereydun Gole Ebrahim Golestan Ali Hatami Abolfazl Jalili Ebrahim Hatamikia Abdolreza Kahani Varuzh Karim-Masihi Samuel Khachikian Abbas Kiarostami Majid Majidi Mohsen Makhmalbaf Dariush Mehrjui Reza Mirkarimi Rasoul Mollagholipour Amir Naderi Jafar Panahi Kambuzia Partovi Fereydoun Rahnema Rasul Sadr Ameli Mohammad Sadri Parviz Shahbazi Sohrab Shahid-Saless Translators Amrollah Abjadian Jaleh Amouzgar Najaf Daryabandari Mohammad Ghazi Lili Golestan Sadegh Hedayat Ramak NikTalab Saleh Hosseini Ahmad Kamyabi Mask Ahmad Shamlou Mohammad Moin Ebrahim Pourdavoud Hamid Samandarian Jalal Sattari Jafar Shahidi Ahmad Tafazzoli Abbas Zaryab Children's literature Samad Behrangi Houshang Moradi Kermani Babak NikTalab Hengameh Mofid Poopak NikTalab Farhad Hasanzadeh Ramak NikTalab Essayists Aydin Aghdashloo Ali Latifiyan Mohammad Ebrahim Bastani Parizi Ehsan Yarshater Ahmad Kasravi Contemporary Persian and Classical Persian are the same language, but writers since 1900 are classified as contemporary. At one time, Persian was a common cultural language of much of the non-Arabic Islamic world.  Today it is the official language of Iran , Tajikistan and one of the two official languages of Afghanistan .

v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah v t e Islamic theology Fields Theologians Books Fields Aqidah Eschatology Ethics Kalam Philosophy ‘Aql Education Logic Peace Science Astronomy Cosmology Physics Sufism Cosmology Metaphysics Philosophy Theologians Ash'arism ( al-Ash'ari ) Al-Bayhaqi Al-Baqillani Al-Juwayni Al-Qushayri Al-Shahrastani Al-Ghazali Al-Taftazani Al-Maziri Ibn Furak Ibn Abi Zayd al-Qayrawani Zakariyya al-Ansari Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi Abu Ishaq al-Isfara'ini Ibn Aqil Ibn Tumart Abdul Qadir Gilani Abu al-Walid al-Baji Abu Bakr ibn al-Arabi Ibn al-Jawzi Qadi Ayyad Ahmad al-Rifa'i Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Sayf al-Din al-Amidi Izz al-Din ibn 'Abd al-Salam Taqi al-Din al-Subki Shihab al-Din al-Qarafi Abu Hayyan al-Gharnati Al-Baydawi Ibn Khaldun Ibn Arafa Abd al-Rahman al-Tha'alibi Ibn Hajar al-Haytami Al-Sha'rani Jalal al-Din al-Dawani Al-Maqqari al-Tilmisani Abd al-Rahman al-Fasi Ibn Ashir Al-Bahūtī Muhammad Mayyara Abu Ali al-Hassan al-Yusi 'Illish Ibrahim al-Bajuri Abdullah ibn Alawi al-Haddad Ahmad al-Dardir Muhammad Arafa al-Desouki Ahmad Zayni Dahlan Said Nursî Early Sunni Abū Ḥanīfah al-Nu'mān ibn Thābit ( Hanafiyah ) Malik ibn Anas ( Maliki ) Al-Shafi'i ( Shafi‘i ) Maturidism ( Al-Maturidi ) Al-Hakim al-Samarqandi Al-Sarakhsi Al-Bazdawi Abu al-Yusr al-Bazdawi Abu al-Mu'in al-Nasafi Abu Ishaq al-Saffar al-Bukhari Abu al-Layth al-Samarqandi 'Ala' al-Din al-Bukhari Al-Sharif al-Jurjani Akmal al-Din al-Babarti Jamal al-Din al-Ghaznawi Nur al-Din al-Sabuni Najm al-Din 'Umar al-Nasafi Siraj al-Din al-Ushi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Khidr Bey Ibn Kemal Ali Qushji Ali al-Qari Al-Maydani Ahmad Sirhindi Anwar Shah Kashmiri Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Shah Abdul Aziz Khalil Ahmad Saharanpuri Zakariyya Kandhlawi Rahmatullah Kairanawi Murtada al-Zabidi Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi Muhammad Abu Zahra Kanthapuram A. P. Aboobacker Musliyar Rumi Mu'attila Al-Ja'd ibn Dirham Mu'jbira Abū Muḥrīz Jahm ibn Ṣafwān ar-Rāsibī as-Samarqāndī at-Tirmidhī Jahmīyya Abū Abdirrahmān Bishr ibn Ghiyāth ibn Abī Karīma al-Marīsī al-Baghdādī Mu'jassimā Abu’l-Hassan Muqātil ibn Sulaymān ibn Bashīr al-Azdī al- |Balkhī (Muqātilīyya) Abū Muḥāmmad (Abū’l-Hākem) Heshām ibn Sālem al-Jawālikī al- Juzjanī al- Kūfī Jawālikīyya Rum Abdals Ibn Karram ( Karramiyya ) Murji'ah Abū Marwān Gaylān ibn Mūslīm ad- Dimashqī an- Nabati al-Qībtī ( Murjī - Qadariyah ) Mu'tazila ( Wasil ibn 'Ata' ) Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm ibn Sayyār ibn Hāni’ an-Nazzām (Nazzāmīyya) Abū Bakr Abdurrahmān ibn Kaysān al-Asāmm Abū Mūsā Isā ibn Subeyh (Sabīh) al-Murdār al-Bāsrī (Murdārīyya) Hīshām ibn Amr al-Fuwātī ash-Shaybānī (Hīshāmīyya) Abū Sahl Abbād ibn Sulaimān (Salmān) as-Sāymarī Abū Alī Muḥāmmad ibn Abdi’l-Wahhāb ibn Sallām al-Jubbā'ī (Jubbāīyya) Abū’l-Hūsayn Abdūrrāhīm ibn Muḥāmmad ibn Uthmān al-Hayyāt (Hayyātīyya) Ja'far ibn Harb Ja'far ibn Mūbassīr Abū Uthmān Amr ibn Bhār ibn Māhbūb al-Jāhiz al-Kinānī (Jāhizīyya) Al-Qadi 'Abd al-Jabbar Abu al-Husayn al-Basri Al-Zamakhshari Amr ibn Ubayd Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Sahib ibn Abbad Abū Amr Ḍirār ibn Amr al-Gatafānī al-Kūfī (Ḍirārīyya) Najjārīyya Abū ʿAbdillāh al-Husayn ibn Muḥāmmad ibn ʿAbdillāh an-Najjār ar-Rāzī Abū Amr (Abū Yahyā) Hāfs al-Fard Muḥāmmad ibn ʿĪsā (Burgūsīyya) Abū ʿAbdallāh Ibnū’z-Zā‘farānī (Zā‘farānīyya) Mustadrakīyya Salafi Theologians Ibn Taymiyyah Ibnul Qayyim Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Wahhabism Al-Shawkani Rashid Rida Ibn Baz Al-Uthaymin Muqbil bin Hadi al-Wadi'i Al-Albani Saleh Al-Fawzan Rabee al-Madkhali Madkhalism Syed Nazeer Husain Ahl-i Hadith Siddiq Hasan Khan Zubair Ali Zai Safar Al-Hawali Sahwa movement Salman al-Ouda Osama bin Laden Salafi Jihadism Ahmad ibn Umar al-Hazimi Hazimism Yasir Qadhi Post-Salafism Twelver Shi'ism Twelve Imams Ali Hasan ibn Ali Husayn ibn Ali Ali al-Sajjad Muhammad al-Baqir Ja'far al-Sadiq Musa al-Kazim Ali al-Rida Muhammad al-Jawad Ali al-Hadi Hasan al-Askari Muhammad al-Mahdi Al-Shaykh Al-Mufid Sharif al-Murtaza Shaykh Tusi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Allamah Al-Hilli Mohammad-Baqer Majlesi Zurarah ibn A'yan Hisham ibn Hakam Agha Zia ol Din Araghi Ja'far Sobhani Ruhollah Khomeini Wilayat al-faqih Isma'ili Shi'ism Al-Qadi al-Nu'man Abu Yaqub al-Sijistani Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani Al-Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Naysaburi Abu'l-Fawaris Ahmad ibn Ya'qub Tayyibi Ismā'īlī doctrine Dhu'ayb ibn Musa Hassan Ala Dhikrihi's Salam Idris Imad al-Din Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Walid Zaydi Shi'ism Abu'l-Jarud al-Hamdani Ahmad ibn Isa ibn Zayd Al-Qasim al-Rassi Al-Hadi ila'l-Haqq Yahya Al-Mansur al-Qasim Key books Sunni books Asas al-Taqdis Al-Baz al-Ashhab Al-Farq bayn al-Firaq Al-Milal wa al-Nihal Al-Irshad Al-Aqidah al-Tahawiyyah Al-Sawad al-A'zam Kitab al-Tawhid Tabsirat al-Adilla Masnavi Fihi Ma Fihi Divan-i Shams-i Tabrizi The Moderation in Belief Shia books Eʿteqādātal-Emāmīya Al-Amali Al-Khisal Awail Al Maqalat Tashih al-I'tiqad Tajrid al-I'tiqad Independent Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Kitab al-Majmu of Alawis Malfūzāt of Ahmadiyya Umm al-kitab of Musta'li Isma'ilism Early Muslim scholars List of contemporary Muslim scholars of Islam Islamic schools and branches Sunni Islam Ahl al-Hadith ( Atharism ) Kullabiyya Ibn Kullab Hanbalis Ahmad ibn Hanbal Al-Qadi Abu Ya'la Khwaja Abdullah Ansari Zahiris Dawud al-Zahiri Salafism Ahl-i Hadith Syed Nazeer Husain / Siddiq Hasan Khan Wahhabism Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Ibn Baz Al-Uthaymin Al-Albani Other Salafi trends Jihadism Madkhalism Sahwa Salafi Modernism Muhammad bin Dawud Maqrizi Ahl ar-Ra'y ( Ilm al-Kalam ) Ash'arism Malikis Shafi'is Abdullah al-Harari – Al-Ahbash Maturidism Hanafis Fazl-e-Haq Khairabadi / Ahmed Raza Khan – Barelvi Muhammad Qasim Nanautavi / Rashid Ahmad Gangohi – Deobandi Shia Islam Zaydism Zayd ibn Ali Jarudiyya Batriyya Imamate Alid dynasties of northern Iran Hasan al-Utrush Yahya ibn Umar Imams of Yemen Extinct Zaydi Shi'a sects Dukayniyya Khalafiyya Imami Mahdiist Shi'ite Sects in Islam Imami Twelver Theology of Twelvers Ja'fari Akhbari Usuli Shaykhism Qizilbash Sheikh Haydar / Shah Ismail / Pir Sultan / Kul Nesîmî – Safavid Islam Ghulat al-Khaṣībī / ibn Nusayr – Alawites Astarabadi (Naimi) / Imadaddin Nasimi – Hurufism / Bektashism Baktāshism Demir Bābā – Alians Bābā Rexheb – Hārābātīs Imami Isma'ilism Fathite Abdallah al-Aftah Batiniyyah Hamdan Qarmat – Sevener Qarmatians Hamza / Baha al-Din al-Muqtana / ad-Darazi – Druzes Fatimids Musta'li Tayyibi Alavi Dawoodi Sulaymani Hafizi Nasir Khusraw al-Qubadiani – Badakhshan Alevism Nizari Hassan-i Sabbah – Assassins Aga Khans – Nizaris / Khojas Pir Sadardin – Satpanth Kaysanites Shia Mukhtār Abū ʿAmra Kaysān Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah – Hashimiyya Hārbīyya ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Hārb ibn al-Kindi Janāhiyya Abdallah ibn Mu'awiya Hārithīyya Riyāhīyya Sam‘ānīyya Bayān ibn Sam‘ān Rezāmīyya Abu Muslim Sunpadh Muḥammirah Khurramites Babak Mazyar al-Muqanna Ishaq al-Turk Khashabiyya Shia Other Mahdists An-Nafs Az-Zakiyyah Hurufiyya Maḥmūd Pasīkhānī – Nuktawiyya Shayki Nuqta-yi Ula – Bábīyya Tawussite Shia ʿAjlan ibn Nawus Waqifite Shia Muhakkima ( Arbitration ) Kharijites Ajardi Abd al-Karīm ibn Adjrād Maymunīyyah Sa'labīyyah Azariqa Nafi ibn al-Azraq al-Hānafī al-Handhalī Bayhasīyyah Abu Bayhas al-Hāytham ibn Jābir Najdat Najdah ibn 'Amir al-Hānafī Sufri Abu Qurra Abū Yazīd Mukhallad ibn Kayrād al- Nukkari Ibadism 'Abdullāh ibn Ibāḍ al-Tamimi Jābir ibn Zayd Abu Qudama Yazid ibn Fandin al- Ifrani Abd Allah ibn Wahb al-Rasibi Wahbiyyah Azzabas Murji'ah ( Hasan ibn Muḥāmmad ibn al- Hanafiyyah ) Karrāmīyya Abū ʿAbdillāh Muḥāmmad ibn Karrām ibn Arrāk ibn Huzāba ibn al-Barā’ as-Sijjī ʿĀbidīyya (ʿUthmān al-ʿĀbid) Dhīmmīyya Hakāiqīyya Haisamīyya (Abū ʿAbdallāh Muhammad ibn al-Haisam) Hīdīyya (Hīd ibn Saif) Ishāqīyya (Abū Yaʿqūb Ishāq ibn Mahmashādh) Maʿīyya Muhājirīyya (Ibrāhīm ibn Muhājir) Nūnīyya Razīnīyya Sauwāqīyya Sūramīyya Tarā'ifīyya (Ahmad ibn ʿAbdūs at-Tarā'ifī) Tūnīyya (Abū Bakr ibn ʿAbdallāh) Wāhidīyya Zarībīyya Other sects Gaylānīyya Gaylān ibn Marwān Yūnusīyya Yūnus ibn Awn an-Namīrī Gassānīyya Gassān al-Kūfī Tūmanīyya Abū Muāz at-Tūmanī Sawbānīyya Abū Sawbān al-Murjī Sālehīyya Sāleh ibn Umar Shamrīyya Abū Shamr Ubaydīyya Ubayd al-Mūktaib Ziyādīyya Muhammad ibn Ziyād al-Kūfī Other Murjīs Al-Harith ibn Surayj Sa'id ibn Jubayr Hammād ibn Abū Sūlaimān Muhārīb ibn Dithār Sābit Kutna Awn ibn Abdullāh Mūsā ibn Abū Kasīr Umar ibn Zar Salm ibn Sālem Hālaf ibn Ayyūb Ibrāhim ibn Yousūf Nusayr ibn Yahyā Ahmad ibn Hārb Amr ibn Murrah Mu'shabbiha Tamsīl Jawārībīyya Dāwūd al-Jawāribî Hāshwīyya Hulmānīyya Abū Hulmān al- Fārisī ad- Dimashqī Qalandariyya Barak Baba Tajsīm Khaṭṭābiyya Abu al-Khattab Bāzīghiyya Bāzīgh ibn Mūsā Muʿāmmarīyya Muʿāmmar ibn Ahmar ʿIjlīyya/Umayrīyya Umayr ibn Bayān al-ʿIjlī Mufaḍḍaliyya al-Mufaddal ibn Umar al-Ju'fi Ghurābīyya Mānsūrīyya Abū Mānsūr al-ʿIjlī Mughīrīyya Abū Abdillāh Mugīre ibn Sāīd al-ʿIjlī el-Bajalī Mukhāmmīsa Namiriya ‘Ulyanīyya/'Alyaīyya Saba'īyya Abdullah ibn Saba' Qadariyah ( Ma'bad al-Juhani ) Alevism Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar – Malamatiyya / Qalandariyya Baba Ishak – Babai revolt Balım Sultan – Bektashi Order Galip Hassan Kuscuoglu – Galibi Order Muʿtazila ( Rationalism ) Mā’marīyya Abū Amr (Abū Mu‘tamīr) Muāmmar ibn Abbād as-Sūlamī Bishriyya Abū Sahl Bīshr ibn al-Mu‘tamīr al-Hilālī al-Baghdādī Abū Abdi’l-Lāh Ahmad ibn Abī Du'ad Faraj ibn Carīr ibn Mâlik al-Iyādī Bahshamiyya Abū Hāshīm Abdu’s-Salām ibn Muḥāmmad ibn Abdi’l-Wahhāb al-Jubbā'ī Huzaylīyya Abū’l-Huzayl Muḥāmmad ibn al-Huzayl ibn Abdillāh al-Allāf al-Abdī al-Bāsrī Abū Ma‘n Sūmāma ibn Ashras an-Nūmayrī al-Bāsrī al-Baghdādī Ikhshīdiyya Nazzāmīyya Ali al-Aswarī Abū Bakr Muḥāmmad ibn Abdillāh ibn Shabīb al-Basrī Hābītīyya Ahmad ibn Hābīt Sumamīyya Sumāma ibn Ashras Kā‘bīyya Abū’l-Kāsīm Abdullāh ibn Ahmad ibn Māhmūd al-Balhī al-Kā‘bī Quranism Ahle Qur'an Kala Kato United Submitters International Rashad Khalifa Edip Yüksel Independent Muslim beliefs Messianism Ahmadiyya Mirza Ghulam Qadiani Lahori Kabbalist Dönmes Sabbatai Zevi – Sabbatean Mahdavīyya Muhammad Jaunpuri / Bandagi Mian Syed Khundmir – Zikris Nation of Islam Wallace Fard Muhammad 's doctrine Modernism Modernist Salafism Muhammad Abduh Muhammad Asad Jamal ad-Din al-Afghani Rashid Rida Other Islamic modernists Taṣawwuf Tariqah Ahmed Raza Khan – Barelvi Hilmi Tunahan – Süleymancı Ahmad al-Rifa'i – Rifa`i Other orders Tawassul Other beliefs Sadaqah Sunnah Taqwa Tawakkul Tewafuq Thawab Other scholars of Sunni schools of jurisprudence : Hanafi Hanbali Maliki Shafi'i Zahiri v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal v t e People of Khorasan Scientists Abu Hatam Isfizari Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Wafa Abu Ubayd Juzjani Abu Zayd Balkhi Alfraganus Ali Qushji Avicenna Birjandi Biruni Hasib Marwazi Ibn Hayyan Abu Ja'far al-Khazin Khazini Khojandi Khwarizmi Nasawi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi Sijzi Philosophers Algazel Amiri Avicenna Farabi Haji Bektash Veli Nasir Khusraw Sijistani Shahrastani Islamic scholars Abu Dawud al-Sijistani Abu Barakat Nasafi Abu Hanifa Abu Hafs Nasafi Abu Layth Samarqandi Abu Mu'in Nasafi Abu Qasim Samarqandi Ansari Baghavi Bayhaqi Bazdawi Bukhari Dabusi Fatima Samarqandi Ghazali Ghaznawi Hakim Tirmidhi Hakim Nishapuri Ibn Hibban Ibn Mubarak Ishaq ibn Rahwayh Ibn Tayfour Sajawandi Juwayni Kasani Kashifi Lamishi Marghinani Maturidi Mulla al-Qari Muqatil Muslim Nasa'i Qushayri Razi Sabuni Sajawandi Sarakhsi Shaykh Tusi Taftazani Tha'labi Nishapuri Tirmidhi Yahya ibn Adam Zamakhshari Poets and artists Abu Sa'id Abu'l-Khayr Anvari Aruzi Samarqandi Asadi Tusi Attar Nishapuri Behzad Daqiqi Farrukhi Sistani Ferdowsi Jami Kashifi Nasir Khusraw Rabia Balkhi Rudaki Rumi Sanā'ī Historians and political figures Abu'l-Fadl Bayhaqi Abu'l-Hasan Isfarayini Abu'l-Ma'ali Nasrallah Abu Muslim Khorasani Gardizi Ali-Shir Nava'i Ata-Malik Juvayni Aufi Abu Ali Bal'ami Gawhar Shad Ibn Khordadbeh Khalid ibn Barmak Minhaj al-Siraj Juzjani Nizam al-Mulk Tahir ibn Husayn Yahya Barmaki Ahmad ibn Nizam al-Mulk Shihab al-Nasawi Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Croatia Sweden Poland Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nasir_Khusraw&oldid=1304266492 " Categories : 11th-century Persian-language poets 11th-century Iranian philosophers Medieval Islamic philosophers Transoxanian Islamic scholars 11th-century people from the Fatimid Caliphate 1004 births 1088 deaths People from Khatlon Region Iranian Ismailis Travel writers of the medieval Islamic world 11th-century Persian-language writers Ismaili literature 11th-century Iranian scientists Geography of Palestine (region) Holy Land travellers 11th-century Iranian geographers Scholars of Persian literature 11th-century explorers Medieval geographers Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles containing Persian-language text CS1: long volume value This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 00:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nasir Khusraw 36 languages Add topic

