Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Historic uses 3 Current use 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Diet (assembly) 15 languages Català Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français Italiano עברית Bahasa Melayu Português Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of deliberative assembly In politics , a diet ( / ˈ d aɪ .

ə t / DY -ət ) is a formal deliberative assembly or legislature. The term is used for some assemblies such as the German Imperial Diet (the general assembly of the Imperial Estates of the Holy Roman Empire ), as well as a designation for modern-day legislative bodies of certain countries and states such as the National Diet of Japan , or the German Bundestag , the Federal Diet.

Etymology [ edit ] The term (also in the nutritional sense) might be derived from Medieval Latin dieta , meaning both "parliamentary assembly" and "daily food allowance", from earlier Latin diaeta , possibly from the Greek διαιτησία ("arbitration"), [ 1 ] or Classical Greek δίαιτα ( diaita ), meaning "way of living", and hence also "diet" (regular food), "regular (daily) work".

[ citation needed ] Through a false etymology , reflected in Latin spelling change in medieval Europe that replaced the ae with e , the word diaeta came to be associated with another Latin word dies , which means "day". Day thus came to be used in postclassical Europe in the sense of "an assembly" and retroactively explained that the day referred to the day of the assembly meeting.

[ 2 ] The association with dies is reflected in the German language 's use of Tagung (meeting) and also -tag , meaning not only "day", as in Mon tag (Mon day ) but also "parliament", "council", or other legislative chamber, as in Bundestag or Reichstag for national parliaments, and Landtag for regional assemblies.

[ 3 ] Historic uses [ edit ] In this sense, it commonly refers to the Imperial Diet assemblies of the Holy Roman Empire : Diet of Augsburg Diet of Nuremberg Diet of Regensburg Diet of Speyer Diet of Worms After the Second Peace of Thorn of 1466, a German-language [ citation needed ] Prussian diet Landtag was held in the lands of Royal Prussia , a province of Poland in personal union with the king of Poland .

The Croatian word for a legislative assembly is sabor (from the verb sabrati se ,  "to assemble"); in historic contexts it is often translated with "diet" in English, as in "the Diet of Dalmatia " ( Dalmatinski sabor ), "the Croatian Diet" ( Hrvatski sabor ), "the Hungarian-Croatian Diet" ( Ugarsko-hrvatski sabor ), or Diet of Bosnia ( Bosansko-hercegovački sabor ).

The Diet of Hungary , customarily called together every three years in Székesfehérvár , Buda or Pressburg , was also called "Diéta" in the Habsburg Empire before the 1848 revolution .

The Riksdag of the Estates was the diet of the four estates of Sweden , from the 15th century until 1866. The Diet of Finland was the successor to the Riksdag of the Estates in the Grand Duchy of Finland , from 1809 to 1906.

The Swiss legislature was the Tagsatzung (French: Diète ) before the Federal Assembly replaced it in the mid-19th century.

The Polish-Lithuanian Sejm was sometimes called a diet.

[ 4 ] Current use [ edit ] The National Diet of Japan, the country's legislative body.

Some universities in the UK and India refer to the period of formal examination and the conclusion of an academic term as an "examination diet".

Scottish legal procedures include diets of proof, debate, appeal or meeting which may be ordered by a court.

[ 5 ] -tag, German name for legislatures such as the Bundestag (lit. "Federal Diet") See also [ edit ] Federal Assembly Landtag The Estates (States) List of legislatures by country Thing (assembly) Reichstag (disambiguation) National Assembly References [ edit ] ^ Georgios, Alafogiannis (2020).

Anthroponymia sto H' biblio ton apodeixeon istorion tou Laonikou Chalkokondyle . School of Philosophy (postgraduate thesis thesis) (in Greek). National University of Athens. p. 30, note 87.

^ Harper, Douglas.

"diet" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ Pfeifer, Wolfgang; et al., eds. (1993).

"Tag" .

Etymologisches Wörterbuch des Deutsche [ Etymological Dictionary of German ] (in German) (print ed.).

digitalized as Pfeifer, Wolfgang (ed.).

"Tag" .

Digitalen Wörterbuch der deutschen Sprache [ Deigital Dictionary of the German Language ] (in German) (online ed.). Berlin-Brandenburg Science Academy . Retrieved 16 September 2023 .

^ "When is a Parliament not a Parliament? The Polish-Lithuanian Sejm and Parliamentary Culture" .

University of Oxford Centre for Intellectual History . Retrieved 17 October 2023 .

^ UK Legislation, Act of Sederunt (Fees of Solicitors in the Sheriff Court) (Amendment and Further Provisions) 1993 , SI 1993/3080, Schedule 1, paragraph 5(c), issued by the Lords of Council and Session, 3 December 1993, accessed 21 June 2021 External links [ edit ] "Diet (meeting)" .

New International Encyclopedia . 1905.

"Diet" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

"Diet (meeting)" .

Collier's New Encyclopedia . 1921.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Diet_(assembly)&oldid=1301109443 " Category : Legislatures Hidden categories: CS1 Greek-language sources (el) CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2014 Articles containing German-language text Articles with unsourced statements from December 2007 Articles containing Croatian-language text Articles containing French-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Collier's Encyclopedia This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 04:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Diet (assembly) 15 languages Add topic

