Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Context 2 Background 3 Probable causes Toggle Probable causes subsection 3.1 Demographic models 3.2 Economic model 3.3 Ideological model 3.4 Political model 4 Overview 5 Northern Europe Toggle Northern Europe subsection 5.1 England 5.2 Ireland 5.3 Scotland 5.3.1 Earldom of Orkney 5.3.2 Kings of the Isles 5.4 Wales 5.5 Iceland 5.6 Kvenland 5.7 Estonia 5.8 Curonians 6 Eastern Europe 7 Central Europe 8 Western Europe Toggle Western Europe subsection 8.1 Frisia 8.2 France 9 Southern Europe Toggle Southern Europe subsection 9.1 Italy 9.2 Spain 9.3 Portugal 10 North America Toggle North America subsection 10.1 Greenland 10.2 Mainland North America 11 Technology 12 Religion 13 Trade 14 Culture Toggle Culture subsection 14.1 Women in Viking society 14.2 Language 14.3 Old Norse influence on other languages 15 Genetics 16 Settlements outside Scandinavia Toggle Settlements outside Scandinavia subsection 16.1 Atlantic 16.2 Baltic 16.3 British Isles 16.3.1 England 16.3.2 Ireland 16.3.3 Isle of Man 16.3.4 Scotland 16.4 Eastern Europe 16.5 Western Europe 16.6 North America 17 Notes 18 Cited sources 19 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 19.1 Background 19.2 General surveys 20 External links Toggle the table of contents Viking Age 57 languages Ænglisc العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kriyòl gwiyannen Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Patois Português Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 14 August 2025 .

Period of European history (about 800–1050) Viking Age picture stone , Gotland , Sweden.

Part of a series on Scandinavia Countries Denmark Finland Iceland Norway Sweden History History by country Åland Denmark Faroe Islands Finland Greenland Iceland Norway Scotland Sweden Chronological history Prehistory Stone Age Bronze Age Iron Age Migration Period Viking Age Norsemen Christianization Kalmar Union Sweden Denmark–Norway Sweden–Norway Denmark–Iceland Nordic Council Geography Mountains Peninsula Baltic Sea North Sea Economy Nordic model Finland Sweden Related Languages Scandinavism Nordic countries Monetary Union Defence Union Scandinavian Airlines Denmark Faroe Islands Finland Iceland Norway Sweden v t e This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Viking Age" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Viking Age (about 800–1050 CE ) was the period during the Middle Ages when Norsemen known as Vikings undertook large-scale raiding, colonising, conquest, and trading throughout Europe and reached North America.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] The Viking Age applies not only to their homeland of Scandinavia but also to any place significantly settled by Scandinavians during the period.

[ 3 ] Although few of the Scandinavians of the Viking Age  were Vikings in the sense of being engaged in piracy, they are often referred to as Vikings as well as Norsemen .

[ 4 ] Voyaging by sea from their homelands in Denmark , Norway , and Sweden , the Norse people settled in the British Isles , Ireland , the Faroe Islands , Iceland , Greenland , Normandy , and the Baltic coast and along the Dnieper and Volga trade routes in eastern Europe, where they were also known as Varangians . They also briefly settled in Newfoundland , becoming the first Europeans to reach North America. The Norse-Gaels , Normans , Rus' people , Faroese , and Icelanders emerged from these Norse colonies. The Vikings founded several kingdoms and earldoms in Europe: the Kingdom of the Isles ( Suðreyjar ), Orkney ( Norðreyjar ), York ( Jórvík ) and the Danelaw ( Danalǫg ), Dublin ( Dyflin ), Normandy , and Kievan Rus' ( Garðaríki ). The Norse homelands were also unified into larger kingdoms during the Viking Age, and the short-lived North Sea Empire included large swathes of Scandinavia and Britain. In 1021, the Vikings achieved the feat of reaching North America—the date of which was not determined until a millennium later.

[ 5 ] Several factors drove this expansion. The Vikings were drawn by the growth of wealthy towns and monasteries overseas and weak kingdoms. They may also have been pushed to leave their homeland by overpopulation, lack of good farmland, and political strife arising from the unification of Norway . The aggressive expansion of the Carolingian Empire and forced conversion of the neighbouring Saxons to Christianity may also have been a factor.

[ 6 ] Sailing innovations had allowed the Vikings to sail farther and longer to begin with.

Information about the Viking Age is drawn largely from primary sources written by those the Vikings encountered, as well as archaeology, supplemented with secondary sources such as the Icelandic Sagas .

Context [ edit ] In England, the Viking attack of 8 June 793 that destroyed the abbey on Lindisfarne , a centre of learning on an island off the north-east coast of England in Northumberland , is regarded as the beginning of the Viking Age.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Judith Jesch has argued that the start of the Viking Age can be pushed back to 700–750, as it was unlikely that the Lindisfarne attack was the first attack, and given archeological evidence that suggests contacts between Scandinavia and the British isles earlier in the century.

[ 7 ] The earliest raids were most likely small in scale, but expanded in scale during the 9th century.

[ 10 ] In the Lindisfarne attack, monks were killed in the abbey, thrown into the sea to drown, or carried away as slaves along with the church treasures, giving rise to the traditional (but unattested) prayer— A furore Normannorum libera nos, Domine , "Free us from the fury of the Northmen, Lord." [ 11 ] Three Viking ships had beached in Weymouth Bay four years earlier (although due to a scribal error the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle dates this event to 787 rather than 789), but that incursion may have been a trading expedition that went wrong rather than a piratical raid. Lindisfarne was different. The Viking devastation of Northumbria 's Holy Island was reported by the Northumbrian scholar Alcuin of York , who wrote: "Never before in Britain has such a terror appeared".

[ 12 ] Vikings were portrayed as wholly violent and bloodthirsty by their enemies.

Robert of Gloucester 's Chronicle, c. 1300, mentions Viking attacks on the people of East Anglia wherein they are described as "wolves among sheep".

[ 13 ] The first challenges to the many negative depictions of Vikings in Britain emerged in the 17th century. Pioneering scholarly works on the Viking Age reached only a small readership there, while linguists traced the Viking Age origins of rural idioms and proverbs. New dictionaries and grammars of the Old Icelandic language appeared, enabling more Victorian scholars to read the primary texts of the Icelandic Sagas.

[ 14 ] In Scandinavia, the 17th-century Danish scholars Thomas Bartholin and Ole Worm and Swedish scholar Olaus Rudbeck were the first to use runic inscriptions and Icelandic Sagas as primary historical sources. During the Enlightenment and Nordic Renaissance, historians such as the Icelandic-Norwegian Thormodus Torfæus , Danish-Norwegian Ludvig Holberg , and Swedish Olof von Dalin developed a more "rational" and "pragmatic" approach to historical scholarship.

By the latter half of the 18th century, while the Icelandic sagas were still used as important historical sources, the Viking Age had again come to be regarded as a barbaric and uncivilised period in the history of the Nordic countries. Scholars outside Scandinavia did not begin to extensively reassess the achievements of the Vikings until the 1890s, recognising their artistry, technological skills, and seamanship.

[ 15 ] Background [ edit ] Faroese stamps celebrating the Viking voyages in the North Atlantic The Vikings who invaded western and eastern Europe were mainly pagans from the same area as present-day Denmark, Norway, and Sweden. They also settled in the Faroe Islands , Ireland, Iceland, peripheral Scotland ( Caithness , the Hebrides and the Northern Isles ), Greenland, and Canada.

Their North Germanic language , Old Norse , became the precursor to present-day Scandinavian languages. By 801, a strong central authority appears to have been established in Jutland , and the Danes were beginning to look beyond their own territory for land, trade, and plunder.

In Norway, mountainous terrain and fjords formed strong natural boundaries. Communities remained independent of each other, unlike the situation in lowland Denmark. By 800, some 30 small kingdoms existed in Norway.

The sea was the easiest way of communication between the Norwegian kingdoms and the outside world. In the eighth century, Scandinavians began to build ships of war and send them on raiding expeditions which started the Viking Age. The North Sea rovers were traders, colonisers, explorers, and plunderers who were notorious in England, Scotland, Ireland, Wales and other places in Europe for being brutal.

Probable causes [ edit ] Part of a series on the Norsemen Extent of Norse language in AD 900: Western Norse in red and Eastern Norse in orange.  Yellow, green and blue denote related Germanic languages.

Scandinavia History History Nordic Stone Age Nordic Bronze Age Pre-Roman Iron Age Roman Iron Age Germanic Iron Age Migration Period Viking Age Norse–Gaels Normans Christianization Old Norse religion Gods Æsir Vanir Jötunn Sigurd Sigmund Wayland the Smith Vættir Elf Dökkálfar and Ljósálfar Dwarf (folklore) Einherjar Fenrir Hel (mythological being) Dís Norns Valkyrie Jörmungandr Ask and Embla Cosmology Asgard Vanaheimr Midgard Vígríðr Bifröst Fólkvangr Ginnungagap Hel (location) Muspelheim Niflheim Mímisbrunnr Hvergelmir Urðarbrunnr Yggdrasill Valhalla Jötunheimr Rituals and worship Blót Seiðr Norse funeral Yule Walpurgis Night Midsummer Hörgr Heathen hof Vé (shrine) Gothi Early Germanic calendars Runic magic Seeress (Germanic) Galdr Death in Norse paganism Society Berserker Earl Ergi Erilaz Félag Germanic kingship Hird Holmgang Leidang Mead hall Medieval Scandinavian law Nithing pole Nīþ Norse clans Old Norse Thing Thrall Events Æsir–Vanir War Fimbulwinter Ragnarök Wild Hunt Sources Poetic Edda Prose Edda Tyrfing Cycle Völsung Cycle Saga Runestones WikiProject Norse history and culture v t e Main article: Viking expansion Many theories are posited for the cause of the Viking invasions; the will to explore likely played a major role. At the time, England, Wales, and Ireland were vulnerable to attack, being divided into many different warring kingdoms in a state of internal disarray, while the Franks were well defended. Overpopulation, especially near the Scandes , was a possible reason, although some disagree with this theory.

[ 16 ] Technological advances like the use of iron and a shortage of women due to selective female infanticide also likely had an impact.

[ 17 ] Tensions caused by Frankish expansion to the south of Scandinavia, and their subsequent attacks upon the Viking peoples, may have also played a role in Viking pillaging.

[ citation needed ] Harald I of Norway ("Harald Fairhair") had united Norway around this time and displaced many peoples. As a result, these people sought for new bases to launch counter-raids against Harald.

Viking expansion in Europe between the 8th and 11th centuries: The yellow colour includes expansions of the Normans Debate among scholars is ongoing as to why the Scandinavians began to expand from the eighth through 11th centuries. Various factors have been highlighted: demographic, economic, ideological, political, technological, and environmental models.

[ 18 ] Demographic models [ edit ] Barrett considers that prior scholarship having examined causes of the Viking Age in terms of demographic determinism, the resulting explanations have generated a "wide variety of possible models". While admitting that Scandinavia did share in the general European population and settlement expansion at the end of the first millennium, he dismisses 'population pressure' as a realistic cause of the Viking Age.

[ 19 ] Bagge alludes to the  evidence of demographic growth at the time, manifested in an increase of new settlements, but he declares that a warlike people do not require population pressure to resort to plundering abroad. He grants that although population increase was a factor in this expansion, it was not the incentive for such expeditions.

[ 20 ] According to Ferguson, the proliferation of the use of iron in Scandinavia at the time increased agricultural yields, allowing for demographic growth that strained the limited capacity of the land.

[ 21 ] As a result, many Scandinavians found themselves with no property and no status. To remedy this, these landless men took to piracy to obtain material wealth. The population continued to grow, and the pirates looked further and further beyond the borders of the Baltic , and eventually into all of Europe.

[ 22 ] Historian Anders Winroth has also challenged the "overpopulation" thesis, arguing that scholars are "simply repeating an ancient cliché that has no basis in fact." [ 23 ] Economic model [ edit ] The economic model states that the Viking Age was the result of growing urbanism and trade throughout mainland Europe. As the Islamic world grew, so did its trade routes, and the wealth which moved along them was pushed further and further north.

[ 24 ] In Western Europe, proto-urban centres such as those with names ending in wich , the so-called -wich towns of Anglo-Saxon England , began to boom during the prosperous era known as the "Long Eighth Century".

[ 25 ] The Scandinavians, like many other Europeans, were drawn to these wealthier "urban" centres, which soon became frequent targets of Viking raids. The connection of the Scandinavians to larger and richer trade networks lured the Vikings into Western Europe, and soon the rest of Europe and parts of the Middle East. In England, hoards of Viking silver, such as the Cuerdale Hoard and the Vale of York Hoard , offer insight into this phenomenon. Barrett rejects this model, arguing that the earliest recorded Viking raids were in Western Norway and northern Britain, which were not highly economically integrated areas. He proposes a version of the economic model that points to new economic incentives stemming from a "bulge" in the population of young Scandinavian men, impelling them to engage in maritime activity due to limited economic alternatives.

[ 18 ] Ideological model [ edit ] This era coincided with the Medieval Warm Period (800–1300) and stopped with the start of the Little Ice Age (about 1250–1850). The start of the Viking Age, with the sack of Lindisfarne, also coincided with Charlemagne 's Saxon Wars , or Christian wars with pagans in Saxony . Bruno Dumézil theorises that the Viking attacks may have been in response to the spread of Christianity among pagan peoples.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Because of the penetration of Christianity in Scandinavia , serious conflict divided Norway for almost a century.

Political model [ edit ] The first of two main components to the political model is the external "pull" factor, which suggests that the weak political bodies of Britain and Western Europe made for an attractive target for Viking raiders.

[ citation needed ] The reasons for these weaknesses vary, but generally can be simplified into decentralised polities, or religious sites. As a result, Viking raiders found it easy to sack and then retreat from these areas which were thus frequently raided. The second case is the internal "push" factor, which coincides with a period just before the Viking Age in which Scandinavia was undergoing a mass centralisation of power in the modern-day countries of Denmark, Sweden, and especially Norway. This centralisation of power forced hundreds of chieftains from their lands, which were slowly being appropriated by the kings and dynasties that began to emerge. As a result, many of these chiefs sought refuge elsewhere, and began harrying the coasts of the British Isles and Western Europe.

[ 31 ] Anders Winroth argues that purposeful choices by warlords "propelled the Viking Age movement of people from Scandinavia." [ 23 ] Technological model This model suggests that the Viking Age occurred as a result of technological innovations that allowed the Vikings to go on their raids in the first place.

[ 32 ] There is no doubt that piracy existed in the Baltic before the Viking Age, but developments in sailing technology and practice made it possible for early Viking raiders to attack lands farther away.

[ 33 ] [ 20 ] Among these developments are included the use of larger sails, tacking practices, and 24-hour sailing.

[ 19 ] Anders Winroth writes, "If early medieval Scandinavians had not become exquisite shipwrights, there would have been no Vikings and no Viking Age." [ 34 ] These models constitute much of what is known about the motivations for and the causes of the Viking Age. In all likelihood, the beginning of this age was the result of some combination of the aforementioned hypotheses.

The Viking colonisation of islands in the North Atlantic has in part been attributed to a period of favourable climate (the Medieval Climactic Optimum), as the weather was relatively stable and predictable, with calm seas.

[ 35 ] Sea ice was rare, harvests were typically strong, and fishing conditions were good.

[ 35 ] Overview [ edit ] Viking-era towns of Scandinavia The earliest date given for the coming of Vikings to England is 789 during the reign of King Beorhtric of Wessex . According to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle three Norwegian boats from Hordaland (Old Norse: Hǫrðalandi ) landed at the Isle of Portland off the coast of Dorset. They apparently were mistaken for merchants by a royal official, Beaduhard, [ 36 ] a king's reeve who attempted to force them to come to the king's manor, whereupon they killed the reeve and his men.

[ 37 ] The beginning of the Viking Age in the British Isles is often set at 793. It was recorded in the Anglo–Saxon Chronicle that the Northmen raided the important island monastery of Lindisfarne (the generally accepted date is actually 8 June, not January [ 9 ] ): A.D. 793. This year came dreadful fore-warnings over the land of the Northumbrians, terrifying the people most woefully: these were immense sheets of light rushing through the air, and whirlwinds, and fiery dragons flying across the firmament. These tremendous tokens were soon followed by a great famine: and not long after, on the sixth day before the ides of January in the same year, the harrowing inroads of heathen men made lamentable havoc in the church of God in Holy-island (Lindisfarne) , by rapine and slaughter.

— Anglo Saxon Chronicle .

[ 38 ] In 794, according to the Annals of Ulster , a serious attack was made on Lindisfarne's mother-house of Iona , which was followed in 795 by raids upon the northern coast of Ireland. From bases there, the Norsemen attacked Iona again in 802, causing great slaughter amongst the Céli Dé Brethren, and burning the abbey to the ground.

The Vikings primarily targeted Ireland until 830, as England and the Carolingian Empire were able to fight the Vikings off.

[ 39 ] However, after 830 CE , the Vikings had considerable success against England, the Carolingian Empire, and other parts of Western Europe.

[ 39 ] After 830, the Vikings exploited disunity within the Carolingian Empire, as well as pitting the English kingdoms against each other.

[ 39 ] Viking expeditions (blue line): depicting the immense breadth of their voyages through most of Europe , the Mediterranean Sea , Northern Africa , Asia Minor , the Arctic , and North America .

Lower Normandy , depicted as a "Viking territory in 911", was not part of the lands granted by the king of the Franks to Rollo in 911, but Upper Normandy .

The Kingdom of the Franks under Charlemagne was particularly devastated by these raiders, who could sail up the Seine with near impunity. Near the end of Charlemagne's reign (and throughout the reigns of his sons and grandsons), a string of Norse raids began, culminating in a gradual Scandinavian conquest and settlement of the region now known as Normandy in 911. Frankish King Charles the Simple granted the Duchy of Normandy to Viking warleader Rollo (a chieftain of disputed Norwegian or Danish origins) [ 40 ] in order to stave off attacks by other Vikings.

[ 39 ] Charles gave Rollo the title of duke. In return, Rollo swore fealty to Charles, converted to Christianity, and undertook to defend the northern region of France against the incursions of other Viking groups. Several generations later, the Norman descendants of these Viking settlers not only identified themselves as Norman, but also carried the Norman language (either a French dialect or a Romance language which can be classified as one of the Oïl languages along with French, Picard and Walloon), and their Norman culture, into England in 1066. With the Norman Conquest , they became the ruling aristocracy of Anglo–Saxon England .

The clinker -built longships used by the Scandinavians were uniquely suited to both deep and shallow waters. They extended the reach of Norse raiders, traders, and settlers along coastlines and along the major river valleys of north-western Europe.

Rurik also expanded to the east, and in 859 became ruler either by conquest or invitation by local people of the city of Novgorod (which means "new city") on the Volkhov River .

His successors moved further, founding the early East Slavic state of Kievan Rus' with the capital in Kiev . This persisted until 1240, when the Mongols invaded Kievan Rus' .

Other Norse people continued south to the Black Sea and then on to Constantinople . The eastern connections of these " Varangians " brought Byzantine silk , a cowrie shell from the Red Sea, and even coins from Samarkand , to Viking York .

In 884, an army of Danish Vikings was defeated at the Battle of Norditi (also called the Battle of Hilgenried Bay) on the Germanic North Sea coast by a Frisian army under Archbishop Rimbert of Bremen-Hamburg, which precipitated the complete and permanent withdrawal of the Vikings from East Frisia . In the 10th and 11th centuries, Saxons and Slavs began to use trained mobile cavalry successfully against Viking foot soldiers, making it hard for Viking invaders to fight inland.

[ 41 ] In Scandinavia, the Viking Age is considered by some scholars to have ended with the establishment of royal authority and the establishment of Christianity as the dominant religion.

[ 42 ] Scholars have proposed different end dates for the Viking Age, but many argue it ended in the 11th century. The year 1000 is sometimes used, as that was the year in which Iceland converted to Christianity, marking the conversion of all of Scandinavia to Christianity. The death of Harthacnut, the Danish King of England, in 1042 has also been used as an end date.

[ 7 ] History does not often allow such clear-cut separation between arbitrary "ages", and it is not easy to pin down a single date that applies to all the Viking world. The Viking Age was not a "monolithic chronological period" across three or four hundred years, but was characterised by various distinct phases of Viking activity. It is unlikely that the Viking Age could be so neatly assigned a terminal event.

[ 43 ] The end of the Viking era in Norway is marked by the Battle of Stiklestad in 1030, in which Óláfr Haraldsson (later known as Olav the Holy ), a fervent Christianiser who dealt harshly with those suspected of clinging to pagan cult, was killed.

[ 44 ] Although Óláfr's army lost the battle, Christianity continued to spread, and after his death he became one of the subjects of the three miracle stories given in the Manx Chronicle .

[ 45 ] In Sweden, the reign of king Olof Skötkonung ( c.

995–1020 ) is considered to be the transition from the Viking Age to the Middle Ages, because he was the first Christian king of the Swedes, and he is associated with a growing influence of the church in what is today southwestern and central Sweden. Norse beliefs persisted until the 12th century; Olof was the last king in Scandinavia to adopt Christianity.

The end of the Viking Age is traditionally marked in England by the failed invasion attempted by the Norwegian king Harald III ( Haraldr Harðráði ), who was defeated by Saxon King Harold Godwinson in 1066 at the Battle of Stamford Bridge ; [ 7 ] in Ireland, the capture of Dublin by Strongbow and his Hiberno-Norman forces in 1171; and 1263 in Scotland by the defeat of King Hákon Hákonarson at the Battle of Largs by troops loyal to Alexander III .

[ citation needed ] Godwinson was subsequently defeated within a month by another Viking descendant, William , Duke of Normandy . Scotland took its present form when it regained territory from the Norse between the 13th and the 15th centuries; the Western Isles and the Isle of Man remained under Scandinavian authority until 1266.

Orkney and Shetland belonged to the king of Norway as late as 1469. Consequently, a "long Viking Age" may stretch into the 15th century.

[ 7 ] Northern Europe [ edit ] See also: Viking activity in the British Isles , Viking expansion § Britain and Ireland , and Invasions of the British Isles § Viking raids and invasions England [ edit ] Anglo-Saxon-Viking coin weight, used for trading bullion and hacksilver : Material is lead and weighs around 36 g (1.3 oz). It is embedded with an Anglo-Saxon sceat (Series K type 32a) dating to 720–750 and minted in Kent. It is edged in a dotted triangle pattern. Origin is the Danelaw region and dates to 870–930.

According to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicles , Viking raiders struck England in 793 and raided Lindisfarne, the monastery that held Saint Cuthbert 's relics, killing the monks and capturing the valuables. The raid marked the beginning of the "Viking Age of Invasion". Great but sporadic violence continued on England's northern and eastern shores, with raids continuing on a small scale across coastal England. While the initial raiding groups were small, a great amount of planning is believed to have been involved. The Vikings raided during the winter of 840–841, rather than the usual summer, having waited on an island off Ireland.

[ 46 ] In 850, the Vikings overwintered for the first time in England, on the island of Thanet , Kent . In 854, a raiding party overwintered a second time, at the Isle of Sheppey in the Thames estuary. In 864, they reverted to Thanet for their winter encampment.

[ 46 ] The following year, the Great Heathen Army , led by brothers Ivar the Boneless , Halfdan and Ubba , and also by another Viking Guthrum , arrived in East Anglia. They proceeded to cross England into Northumbria and captured York, establishing a Viking community in Jorvik , where some settled as farmers and craftsmen. Most of the English kingdoms, being in turmoil, could not stand against the Vikings. In 867, Northumbria became the northern kingdom of the coalescing Danelaw , after its conquest by the Ragnarsson brothers, who installed an Englishman, Ecgberht , as a puppet king. By 870, the "Great Summer Army" arrived in England, led by a Viking leader called Bagsecg and his five earls . Aided by the Great Heathen Army (which had already overrun much of England from its base in Jorvik), Bagsecg's forces, and Halfdan's forces (through an alliance), the combined Viking forces raided much of England until 871, when they planned an invasion of Wessex. On 8 January 871, Bagsecg was killed at the Battle of Ashdown along with his earls. As a result, many of the Vikings returned to northern England, where Jorvic had become the centre of the Viking kingdom, but Alfred of Wessex managed to keep them out of his country. Alfred and his successors continued to drive back the Viking frontier and take York. A new wave of Vikings appeared in England in 947, when Eric Bloodaxe captured York.

In 1003, the Danish King Sweyn Forkbeard started a series of raids against England to avenge the St. Brice's Day massacre of England's Danish inhabitants, culminating in a full-scale invasion that led to Sweyn being crowned king of England in 1013.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] Sweyn was also king of Denmark and parts of Norway at this time.

[ 49 ] The throne of England passed to Edmund Ironside of Wessex after Sweyn's death in 1014. Sweyn's son, Cnut the Great , won the throne of England in 1016 through conquest. When Cnut the Great died in 1035 he was a king of Denmark, England, Norway, and parts of Sweden.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] Harold Harefoot became king of England after Cnut's death, and Viking rule of England ceased.

[ clarification needed ] The Viking presence declined until 1066, when they lost their final battle with the English at Stamford Bridge . The death in the battle of King Harald Hardrada of Norway ended any hope of reviving Cnut's North Sea Empire , and it is because of this, rather than the Norman conquest, that 1066 is often taken as the end of the Viking Age. Nineteen days later, a large army containing and led by senior Normans, themselves mostly male-line descendants of Norsemen, invaded England and defeated the weakened English army at the Battle of Hastings . The army invited others from across Norman gentry and ecclesiastical society to join them. There were several unsuccessful attempts by Scandinavian kings to regain control of England, the last of which took place in 1086.

[ 52 ] In 1152, Eystein II of Norway led a plundering raid down the east coast of Britain.

[ 53 ] Ireland [ edit ] Main articles: History of Ireland (800–1169) , Early Scandinavian Dublin , and Norse-Gaels "Irishmen oppose the landing of the Viking fleet", a painting in Dublin City Hall by James Ward ( c.

1914 ).

In 795, small bands of Vikings began plundering monastic settlements along the coast of Gaelic Ireland . The Annals of Ulster state that in 821 the Vikings plundered Howth and "carried off a great number of women into captivity".

[ 54 ] From 840 the Vikings began building fortified encampments, longphorts , on the coast and overwintering in Ireland. The first were at Dublin and Linn Duachaill .

[ 55 ] Their attacks became bigger and reached further inland, striking larger monastic settlements such as Armagh , Clonmacnoise , Glendalough , Kells , and Kildare , and also plundering the ancient tombs of Brú na Bóinne .

[ 56 ] Viking chief Thorgest is said to have raided the whole midlands of Ireland until he was killed by Máel Sechnaill I in 845.

In 853, Viking leader Amlaíb (Olaf) became the first king of Dublin . He ruled along with his brothers Ímar (possibly Ivar the Boneless ) and Auisle .

[ 57 ] Over the following decades, there was regular warfare between the Vikings and the Irish, and between two groups of Vikings: the Dubgaill and Finngaill (dark and fair foreigners). The Vikings also briefly allied with various Irish kings against their rivals. In 866, Áed Findliath burnt all Viking longphorts in the north, and they never managed to establish permanent settlements in that region.

[ 58 ] The Vikings were driven from Dublin in 902.

[ 59 ] They returned in 914, now led by the Uí Ímair (House of Ivar).

[ 60 ] During the next eight years the Vikings won decisive battles against the Irish, regained control of Dublin, and founded settlements at Waterford , Wexford , Cork , and Limerick , which became Ireland's first large towns. They were important trading hubs, and Viking Dublin was the biggest slave port in western Europe.

[ 61 ] These Viking territories became part of the patchwork of kingdoms in Ireland. Vikings intermarried with the Irish and adopted elements of Irish culture, becoming the Norse-Gaels . Some Viking kings of Dublin also ruled the kingdom of the Isles and York ; such as Sitric Cáech , Gofraid ua Ímair , Olaf Guthfrithson , and Olaf Cuaran .

Sigtrygg Silkbeard was "a patron of the arts, a benefactor of the church, and an economic innovator" who established Ireland's first mint , in Dublin.

[ 62 ] In 980 CE , Máel Sechnaill Mór defeated the Dublin Vikings and forced them into submission.

[ 63 ] Over the following thirty years, Brian Boru subdued the Viking territories and made himself High King of Ireland . The Dublin Vikings, together with Leinster , twice rebelled against him, but they were defeated in the battles of Glenmama (999 CE ) and Clontarf (1014 CE ). After the battle of Clontarf, the Dublin Vikings could no longer "single-handedly threaten the power of the most powerful kings of Ireland".

[ 64 ] Brian's rise to power and conflict with the Vikings is chronicled in Cogad Gáedel re Gallaib ("The War of the Irish with the Foreigners").

Scotland [ edit ] Main article: Scandinavian Scotland While few records are known, the Vikings are thought to have led their first raids in Scotland on the holy island of Iona in 794, the year following the raid on the other holy island of Lindisfarne , Northumbria.

In 839, a large Norse fleet invaded via the River Tay and River Earn , both of which were highly navigable, and reached into the heart of the Pictish kingdom of Fortriu . They defeated Eogán mac Óengusa , king of the Picts, his brother Bran, and the king of the Scots of Dál Riata , Áed mac Boanta , along with many members of the Pictish aristocracy in battle. The sophisticated kingdom that had been built fell apart, as did the Pictish leadership, which had been stable for more than 100 years since the time of Óengus mac Fergusa (The accession of Cináed mac Ailpín as king of both Picts and Scots can be attributed to the aftermath of this event).

In 870, the Britons of the Old North around the Firth of Clyde came under Viking attack as well. The fortress atop Alt Clut ("Rock of the Clyde", the Brythonic name for Dumbarton Rock , which had become the metonym for their kingdom) was besieged by the Viking kings Amlaíb and Ímar . After four months, its water supply failed, and the fortress fell. The Vikings are recorded to have transported a vast prey of British, Pictish, and English captives back to Ireland. These prisoners may have included the ruling family of Alt Clut including the king Arthgal ap Dyfnwal , who was slain the following year under uncertain circumstances. The fall of Alt Clut marked a watershed in the history of the realm. Afterwards, the capital of the restructured kingdom was relocated about 12 miles (20 km) up the River Clyde to the vicinity of Govan and Partick (within present-day Glasgow ), and became known as the Kingdom of Strathclyde , which persisted as a major regional political player for another 150 years.

The land that now comprises most of the Scottish Lowlands had previously been the northernmost part of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Northumbria , which fell apart with its Viking conquest; these lands were never regained by the Anglo-Saxons, or England. The upheaval and pressure of Viking raiding, occupation, conquest and settlement resulted in alliances among the formerly enemy peoples that comprised what would become present-day Scotland. Over the subsequent 300 years, this Viking upheaval and pressure led to the unification of the previously contending Gaelic, Pictish, British, and English kingdoms, first into the Kingdom of Alba , and finally into the greater Kingdom of Scotland .

[ 65 ] The Viking Age in Scotland came to an end after another 100 years. The last vestiges of Norse power in the Scottish seas and islands were completely relinquished after another 200 years.

Earldom of Orkney [ edit ] By the mid-9th century, the Norsemen had settled in Shetland, Orkney (the Nordreys- Norðreyjar ), the Hebrides and Isle of Man, (the Sudreys- Suðreyjar —this survives in the Diocese of Sodor and Man ) and parts of mainland Scotland. The Norse settlers were to some extent integrating with the local Gaelic population (see Norse-Gaels ) in the Hebrides and Man. These areas were ruled over by local Jarls , originally captains of ships or hersirs .

The Jarl of Orkney and Shetland, however, claimed supremacy.

In 875, King Harald Fairhair led a fleet from Norway to Scotland. In his attempt to unite Norway, he found that many of those opposed to his rise to power had taken refuge in the Isles. From here, they were raiding not only foreign lands but were also attacking Norway itself. After organising a fleet, Harald was able to subdue the rebels, and in doing so brought the independent Jarls under his control, many of the rebels having fled to Iceland. He found himself ruling not only Norway, but also the Isles, Man, and parts of Scotland.

Kings of the Isles [ edit ] Main article: Kingdom of the Isles In 876, the Norse-Gaels of Mann and the Hebrides rebelled against Harald. A fleet was sent against them led by Ketil Flatnose to regain control. On his success, Ketil was to rule the Sudreys as a vassal of King Harald . His grandson, Thorstein the Red , and Sigurd the Mighty , Jarl of Orkney, invaded Scotland and were able to exact tribute from nearly half the kingdom until their deaths in battle. Ketil declared himself King of the Isles. Ketil was eventually outlawed and, fearing the bounty on his head, fled to Iceland.

The Norse-Gaelic Kings of the Isles continued to act semi independently, in 973 forming a defensive pact with the Kings of Scotland and Strathclyde . In 1095, the King of Mann and the Isles Godred Crovan was killed by Magnus Barelegs , King of Norway. Magnus and King Edgar of Scotland agreed on a treaty. The islands would be controlled by Norway, but mainland territories would go to Scotland. The King of Norway nominally continued to be king of the Isles and Man. However, in 1156, The kingdom was split into two. The Western Isles and Man continued as to be called the "Kingdom of Man and the Isles", but the Inner Hebrides came under the influence of Somerled , a Gaelic speaker, who was styled 'King of the Hebrides'. His kingdom was to develop latterly into the Lordship of the Isles .

In eastern Aberdeenshire , the Danes invaded at least as far north as the area near Cruden Bay .

[ 66 ] The Jarls of Orkney continued to rule much of northern Scotland until 1196, when Harald Maddadsson agreed to pay tribute to William the Lion , King of Scots, for his territories on the mainland .

The end of the Viking Age proper in Scotland is generally considered to be in 1266. In 1263, King Haakon IV of Norway, in retaliation for a Scots expedition to Skye , arrived on the west coast with a fleet from Norway and Orkney. His fleet linked up with those of King Magnus of Man and King Dougal of the Hebrides . After peace talks failed, his forces met with the Scots at Largs , in Ayrshire. The battle proved indecisive, but it did ensure that the Norse were not able to mount a further attack that year. Haakon died overwintering in Orkney, and by 1266, his son Magnus the Law-Mender ceded the Kingdom of Man and the Isles, with all territories on mainland Scotland to Alexander III, through the Treaty of Perth .

Orkney and Shetland continued to be ruled as autonomous Jarldoms under Norway until 1468, when King Christian I pledged them as security on the dowry of his daughter, who was betrothed to James III of Scotland . Although attempts were made during the 17th and 18th centuries to redeem Shetland, without success, [ 67 ] and Charles II ratifying the pawning in the Orkney and Shetland Act 1669 , explicitly exempting them from any "dissolution of His Majesty's lands", [ 68 ] they are currently considered as being officially part of the United Kingdom.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] Wales [ edit ] Incursions in Wales were decisively reversed at the Battle of Buttington in Powys, in 893, when a combined Welsh and Mercian army under Æthelred, Lord of the Mercians , defeated a Danish band.

Wales was not colonised by the Vikings as heavily as eastern England. The Vikings did, however, settle in the south around St. David 's, Haverfordwest , and Gower , among other places. Place names such as Skokholm, Skomer, and Swansea remain as evidence of the Norse settlement.

[ 71 ] The Vikings, however, did not subdue the Welsh mountain kingdoms.

Iceland [ edit ] According to the Icelandic sagas , Iceland was discovered by Naddodd , a Viking from the Faroe Islands, after which it was settled by mostly Norwegians fleeing the oppressive rule of Harald Fairhair in 985 CE . While harsh, the land allowed for a pastoral farming life familiar to the Norse. According to the saga of Erik the Red , when Erik was exiled from Iceland, he sailed west and pioneered Greenland.

Kvenland [ edit ] Main article: Kvenland Kvenland, known as Cwenland, Kænland, and similar terms in medieval sources, is an ancient name for an area in Scandinavia and Fennoscandia . A contemporary reference to Kvenland is provided in an Old English account written in the 9th century. It used the information provided by the Norwegian adventurer and traveller named Ohthere . Kvenland, in that or close to that spelling, is also known from Nordic sources, primarily Icelandic, but also one that was possibly written in the modern-day area of Norway.

All the remaining Nordic sources discussing Kvenland, using that or close to that spelling, date to the 12th and 13th centuries, but some of them—in part at least—are believed to be rewrites of older texts. Other references and possible references to Kvenland by other names or spellings are discussed in the main article of Kvenland .

Estonia [ edit ] The Iru hillfort in Northern Estonia Main article: Viking Age in Estonia During the Viking Age, Estonia was a Finnic area divided between two major cultural regions, a coastal and an inland one, corresponding to the historical cultural and linguistic division between Northern and Southern Estonian .

[ 72 ] These two areas were further divided between loosely allied regions.

[ 73 ] The Viking Age in Estonia is considered to be part of the Iron Age period which started around 400 CE and ended c.

1200 CE . Some 16th-century Swedish chronicles attribute the Pillage of Sigtuna in 1187 to Estonian raiders.< [ 74 ] The society, economy, settlement and culture of the territory of what is in the present-day the country of Estonia is studied mainly through archaeological sources. The era is seen to have been a period of rapid change. The Estonian peasant culture came into existence by the end of the Viking Age. The overall understanding of the Viking Age in Estonia is deemed to be fragmentary and superficial, because of the limited amount of surviving source material. The main sources for understanding the period are remains of the farms and fortresses of the era, cemeteries and a large amount of excavated objects.

[ 75 ] The landscape of Ancient Estonia featured numerous hillforts, some later hillforts on Saaremaa heavily fortified during the Viking Age and on to the 12th century.

[ 76 ] There were a number of late prehistoric or medieval harbour sites on the coast of Saaremaa, but none have been found that are large enough to be international trade centres.

[ 76 ] The Estonian islands also have a number of graves from the Viking Age, both individual and collective, with weapons and jewellery.

[ 76 ] Weapons found in Estonian Viking Age graves are common to types found throughout Northern Europe and Scandinavia.

[ 77 ] Curonians [ edit ] Main article: Curonians The Curonians [ 78 ] were known as fierce warriors, excellent sailors and pirates. They were involved in several wars and alliances with Swedish , Danish , and Icelandic Vikings .

[ 79 ] In c.

750 , according to Norna-Gests þáttr saga from c.

1157 , Sigurd Hring ("ring"), a legendary king of Denmark and Sweden, fought against the invading Curonians and Kvens (Kvænir) in the southern part of what today is Sweden: "Sigurd Ring (Sigurðr) was not there, since he had to defend his land, Sweden (Svíþjóð), since Curonians (Kúrir) and Kvænir were raiding there." [ 80 ] Curonians are mentioned among other participants of the Battle of Brávellir .

Grobin (Grobiņa) was the main centre of the Curonians during the Vendel Age .

[ 81 ] From the 10th to 13th century, Palanga served as an important economical, political and cultural centre for the Curonians.

[ 82 ] Chapter 46 of Egils Saga describes one Viking expedition by the Vikings Thorolf and Egill Skallagrímsson in Courland. According to some opinions, they took part in attacking Sweden's main city Sigtuna in 1187.

[ 74 ] Curonians established temporary settlements near Riga and in overseas regions including eastern Sweden and the islands of Gotland [ 83 ] and Bornholm .

Scandinavian settlements existed along the southeastern Baltic coast in Truso and Kaup ( Old Prussia ), Palanga [ 84 ] ( Samogitia , Lithuania) as well as Grobin ( Courland , Latvia).

Eastern Europe [ edit ] The Varangians or Varyagi were Scandinavians, often Swedes, who migrated eastwards and southwards through what is now Belarus, Russia, and Ukraine, mainly in the 9th and 10th centuries. Engaging in trade , piracy , and mercenary activities, they roamed the river systems and portages of Gardariki , reaching the Caspian Sea and Constantinople.

[ 85 ] Contemporary English publications also use the name " Viking " for early Varangians in some contexts.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] The term Varangian remained in usage in the Byzantine Empire until the 13th century, largely disconnected from its Scandinavian roots by then. Having settled Aldeigja (Ladoga) in the 750s, Scandinavian colonists were probably an element in the early ethnogenesis of the Rus' people , and likely played a role in the formation of the Rus' Khaganate .

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] The Varangians are first mentioned by the Primary Chronicle as having exacted tribute from the Slavic and Finnic tribes in 859 CE .

[ 90 ] It was the time of rapid expansion of the Vikings in Northern Europe; England began to pay Danegeld in 859 CE , and the Curonians of Grobin faced an invasion by the Swedes at about the same date.

Longship on Tjängvide image stone , Sweden 800–1099 CE .

The text of the Primary Chronicle says that in 860–862, the Finnic and Slavic tribes rebelled against the Varangian Rus', driving them  back to Scandinavia, but soon started to conflict with each other. The disorder prompted the tribes to invite back the Varangian Rus' to "Come and rule and reign over us" and bring peace to the region. This was a somewhat bilateral relation with the Varangians defending the cities that they ruled. Led by Rurik and his brothers Truvor and Sineus , the Varangians settled around the town of Novgorod (Holmgarðr).

[ 91 ] In the 9th century, the Rus' operated the Volga trade route , which connected northern Russia ( Gardariki ) with the Middle East ( Serkland ). As the Volga route declined by the end of the century, the trade route from the Varangians to the Greeks rapidly overtook it in popularity. Apart from Ladoga and Novgorod, Gnezdovo and Gotland were major centres for Varangian trade.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] The consensus among western scholars, disputed by Russian scholars, who believe them to be a Slavic tribe, [ 94 ] is that the Rus' people originated in what is currently coastal eastern Sweden around the 8th century, and that their name has the same origin as that of Roslagen in Sweden .

[ 95 ] The maritime districts of East Götland and Uppland were known in earlier times as Roþer or Roþin, and later as Roslagen.

[ 96 ] According to Thorsten Andersson , the Russian folk name Rus' ultimately derives from the noun roþer ('rowing'), a word also used in naval campaigns in the leþunger (Old Norse: leiðangr ) system of organizing a coastal fleet. The Old Swedish place name Roþrin, in the older iteration Roþer , contains the word roþer and is still used in the form of Roden as a historical name for the coastal areas of Svealand . In modern times the name still exists as Roslagen, the name of the coastal area of Uppland province.

[ 97 ] According to Stefan Brink, the name Rus ' derives from the words ro (row) and rodd (a rowing session).

[ 98 ] The term "Varangian" became more common from the 11th century onwards.

[ 99 ] In these years, Swedish men left to enlist in the Byzantine Varangian Guard in such numbers that a medieval Swedish law, Västgötalagen , used in the province Västergötland , declared that no one could inherit while staying in "Greece"—the then Scandinavian term for the Byzantine Empire —to stop the emigration, [ 100 ] especially as two other European courts simultaneously also recruited Scandinavians: [ 101 ] Kievan Rus' c.

980–1060 and London 1018–1066 (the Þingalið ).

[ 101 ] In contrast to the notable Scandinavian influence in Normandy and the British Isles, Varangian culture did not survive to a great extent in the East. Instead, the Varangian ruling classes of the two powerful city-states of Novgorod and Kiev were thoroughly Slavicised by the beginning of the 11th century. Some evidence suggests that Old Norse may have been spoken amongst the Rus' later, however.

Old East Norse was probably still spoken in Kievan Rus' at Novgorod until the 13th century, according to the Nationalencyklopedin (Swedish National Encyclopedia).

[ 102 ] Central Europe [ edit ] Further information: Pomerania during the Early Middle Ages Stone ships at Altes Lager Menzlin Viking Age Scandinavian settlements were set up along the southern coast of the Baltic Sea , primarily for trade purposes. Their emergence appears to coincide with the settlement and consolidation of the coastal Slavic tribes in the respective areas.

[ 103 ] The archaeological record indicates that substantial cultural exchange between Scandinavian and Slavic traditions and technologies occurred.

[ 104 ] It is known that Slavic and Scandinavian craftsmen had different processes in crafts and productions. In the lagoons and delta of the eastern and southern Baltic there is evidence of Slavic boatbuilding practices somewhat divergent from the Viking tradition, and of a fusion of the two in a shipyard site from the Viking Age on the island of Falster in Denmark.

[ 105 ] Slavic-Scandinavian settlements on the Mecklenburgian coast include the maritime trading center Reric ( Groß Strömkendorf ) on the eastern coast of Wismar Bay , [ 106 ] and the multi-ethnic trade emporium Dierkow (near Rostock ).

[ 107 ] Reric was set up around the year 700, [ 106 ] but following later warfare between Obodrites and Danes , the inhabitants, who were subject to the Danish king, were resettled to Haithabu by him.

[ 107 ] Dierkow apparently belongs to the late 8th to the early 9th century.

[ 108 ] Scandinavian settlements on the Pomeranian coast include Wolin (on the isle of Wolin ), Ralswiek (on the isle of Rügen ), Altes Lager Menzlin (on the lower Peene river), [ 109 ] and Bardy-Świelubie near modern Kołobrzeg .

[ 110 ] Menzlin was set up in the mid-8th century.

[ 106 ] Wolin and Ralswiek began to prosper in the course of the 9th century.

[ 107 ] A merchants' settlement has also been suggested near Arkona , but no archeological evidence supports this theory.

[ 111 ] Menzlin and Bardy-Świelubie were vacated in the late 9th century, [ 112 ] Ralswiek survived into the new millennium, but by the time written chronicles reported news of the island of Rügen in the 12th century, it had lost all its importance.

[ 107 ] Wolin, thought to be identical with the legendary Vineta and the semilegendary Jomsborg , [ 113 ] base of the Jomsvikings , was destroyed in 1043 by Dano-Norwegian king Magnus the Good , [ 114 ] according to the Heimskringla .

[ 115 ] Castle building by the Slavs seems to have reached a high level on the southern Baltic coast in the 8th and 9th centuries, possibly explained by a threat coming from the sea or from the trade emporiums, as Scandinavian arrowheads found in the area indicate advances penetrating as far as the lake chains in the Mecklenburgian and Pomeranian hinterlands.

[ 107 ] v t e Norse people Scandinavia History History Nordic Stone Age Nordic Bronze Age Pre-Roman Iron Age Roman Iron Age Germanic Iron Age Migration Period Viking Age Old Norse religion Germanic paganism Norse mythology Christianization Expansion Norse–Gaels Normans Garðaríki Exploration of the Americas Trade route Viking Trade Routes Varangian Trade Routes Volga Trade Route Paganism and mythology Gods Æsir Vanir Jötunn Sigurd Sigmund Völundr Vættir Elves Light elves Dark elves Dvergr Einherjar Fenrir Hel (being) Dís Norns Valkyries Jörmungandr Ask and Embla Cosmology Ásgarðr Vanaheimr Miðgarðr Vígríðr Bifröst Fólkvangr Ginnungagap Helheim Múspellsheimr Niflheimr Mímisbrunnr Hvergelmir Urðarbrunnr Yggdrasill Valhalla Jötunheimr Rituals and worship Blót Seiðr Norse funeral Yule Walpurgis Night Midsummer Hörgr Vé Gothi Calendar Runic magic Völva Galdr Death in Norse paganism Society Law Clans Jarl Thegn Thrall Félag Thing Mead hall Holmgang Old Norse Runes Runemaster Nithing pole Skalds Longships Nīþ Ergi Vikings Berserkers Emporium Events Æsir–Vanir War Fimbulwinter Ragnarök Wild Hunt Sources Poetic Edda Prose Edda Tyrfing Cycle Völsung Cycle Saga Runestones Settlements Alaborg Aldeigja Arkona Bardy-Świelubie Birka Dierkow Gnezdovo Grobin Hedeby Holmgard Jomsborg Kaup Kaupang Köpingsvik Lindholm Menzlin Ralswiek Reric Ribe Sarskoye Sigtuna Timerevo Truso Vanaja Wolin WikiProject Norse history and culture Western Europe [ edit ] Frisia [ edit ] Main article: Viking raids in the Rhineland Frisia was a region which spanned from around modern-day Bruges to the islands on the west coast of Jutland—including large parts of the Low Countries . This region was progressively brought under Frankish control ( Frisian-Frankish wars ), but the Christianization of the local population and cultural assimilation was a slow process. However, several Frisian towns, most notably Dorestad were raided by Vikings.

Rorik of Dorestad was a famous Viking raider in Frisia. On Wieringen the Vikings most likely had a base of operations. Viking leaders took an active role in Frisian politics, such as Godfrid, Duke of Frisia , as well as Rorik.

France [ edit ] See also: Siege of Paris (845) , Siege of Paris (885–886) , Viking incursions into Gascony , and History of Normandy The French region of Normandy takes its name from the Viking invaders who were called Normanni , which means 'men of the North'.

The first Viking raids began between 790 and 800 along the coasts of western France. They were carried out primarily in the summer, as the Vikings wintered in Scandinavia. Several coastal areas were lost to Francia during the reign of Louis the Pious (814–840). But the Vikings took advantage of the quarrels in the royal family caused after the death of Louis the Pious to settle their first colony in the south-west ( Gascony ) of the kingdom of Francia, which was more or less abandoned by the Frankish kings after their two defeats at Roncevaux . The incursions in 841 CE caused severe damage to Rouen and Jumièges . The Viking attackers sought to capture the treasures stored at monasteries , easy prey given the monks' lack of defensive capacity. In 845 CE an expedition up the Seine reached Paris . The presence of Carolingian deniers of c.

847 , found in 1871 among a hoard at Mullaghboden, County Limerick, where coins were neither minted nor normally used in trade, probably represents booty from the raids of 843–846.

[ 116 ] However, from 885 to 886, Odo of Paris (Eudes de Paris) succeeded in defending Paris against Viking raiders.

[ 117 ] His military success allowed him to replace the Carolingians.

[ 118 ] In 911, a band of Viking warriors attempted to siege Chartres but was defeated by Robert I of France . Robert's victory later paved way for the baptism, and settlement in Normandy, of Viking leader Rollo.

[ 119 ] Rollo reached an agreement with Charles the Simple to sign the Treaty of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte , under which Charles gave Rouen and the area of present-day Upper Normandy to Rollo, establishing the Duchy of Normandy . In exchange, Rollo pledged vassalage to Charles in 940, agreed to be baptised , and vowed to guard the estuaries of the Seine from further Viking attacks. During Rollo's baptism Robert I of France stood as his godfather.

[ 120 ] The Duchy of Normandy also annexed further areas in Northern France, expanding the territory which was originally negotiated.

The Scandinavian expansion included Danish and Norwegian as well as Swedish elements, all under the leadership of Rollo . By the end of the reign of Richard I of Normandy in 996 (aka Richard the Fearless / Richard sans Peur), all descendants of Vikings became, according to Cambridge Medieval History (Volume 5, Chapter XV), 'not only Christians but in all essentials Frenchmen'.

[ 121 ] During the Middle Ages, the Normans created one of the most powerful feudal states of Western Europe . The Normans conquered England and southern Italy in 11th century, and played a key role in the Crusades .

Southern Europe [ edit ] Italy [ edit ] In 959, a major long-distance Viking expedition, under the command of two famed Vikings, Björn Ironside and Hásteinn , set out for Spain from their base on the Loire with the objective of sacking the city of Rome. They tried to land at Galicia and were driven off. Then they sailed down the west coast of the peninsula and burned the mosque at Seville, but were repelled by a large Muslim force there before entering the Mediterranean through the Straits of Gibraltar and burning the mosque at Algeciras, following which they headed south to Nekor on the coast of Morocco, plundered the city and defeated a Muslim force that attempted to stop them.

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] According to an account by the Norman monk Dudo of Saint-Quentin , a Viking fleet under Björn Ironside and Hásteinn landed at the Ligurian port of Luni and sacked the city. The Vikings then moved another 60 miles down the Tuscan coast to the mouth of the Arno , sacking Pisa and then, following the river upstream, also the hill-town of Fiesole above Florence .

[ 124 ] [ 123 ] Many Anglo-Danish and Varangian mercenaries fought in Southern Italy, including Harald Hardrada and William de Hauteville who conquered parts of Sicily between 1038 and 1040, [ 125 ] [ 126 ] and Edgar the Ætheling who fought in the Norman conquest of southern Italy .

[ 127 ] Runestones were raised in Sweden in memory of warriors who died in Langbarðaland ( Land of the Lombards ), the Old Norse name for southern Italy.

[ 128 ] Several Anglo-Danish and Norwegian nobles participated in the Norman conquest of southern Italy , like Edgar the Ætheling , who left England in 1086, [ 127 ] and Jarl Erling Skakke , who won his nickname ("Skakke", meaning bent head) after a battle against Arabs in Sicily.

[ 129 ] On the other hand, many Anglo-Danish rebels fleeing William the Conqueror , joined the Byzantines in their struggle against the Robert Guiscard , duke of Apulia , in Southern Italy.

[ 130 ] Spain [ edit ] Further information: Vikings in Iberia Statue in Catoira , Galicia , commemorating the Viking invasions After 842, the Vikings set up a permanent base at the mouth of the river Loire from whence they could strike as far as northern Spain.

[ 131 ] These Vikings were Hispanicised in all the Christian kingdoms, while they kept their ethnic identity and culture in al-Andalus .

[ 132 ] The southern coast of the Mediterranean Sea, both sides of the Strait of Gibraltar , and much of the Iberian peninsula were under Muslim rule when Vikings first entered the Mediterranean in the 9th century. The Vikings launched their campaigns from their strongholds in Francia into this realm of Muslim influence; following the coastline of the Kingdom of Asturias they sailed through the Gibraltar strait (known to them as Nǫrvasund , the 'Narrow Sound') into what they called Miðjarðarhaf , literally 'Middle of the earth' sea, [ 133 ] with the same meaning as the Late Latin Mare Mediterrāneum .

[ 134 ] The first Viking attacks in al-Andalus in 844 CE greatly affected the region.

[ 135 ] Medieval texts such as the Chronicon albeldense and the Annales Bertiniani tell of a Viking fleet that left Toulouse and made raids in Asturias and Galicia. According to the Historia silense it had 60 ships. Being repulsed in Galicia ( Ghilīsīa ), the fleet sailed southward around the peninsula, raiding coastal towns along the way.

[ 136 ] In Irene García Losquiño's telling, these Vikings navigated their boats up the river Guadalquivir towards Išbīliya ( Seville ) and destroyed Qawra (Coria del Río), a small town about 15 km south of the city. Then they took Išbīliya , from which they controlled the region for several weeks.

[ 136 ] Their attack on the city forced its inhabitants to flee to Qarmūnâ (Carmona), a fortified city. The Emirate of Qurṭuba made great exertions to recover Išbīliya , and succeeded with the assistance of Qurṭuba ( Córdoba ) and the Banu Qasi , who ruled over a semi-autonomous state in the Upper March of the Ebro Valley .

[ 137 ] Consequently, defensive walls were built at Išbīliya , and the emir Abd al-Raḥmān II invested in the construction of a large fleet of ships to protect the entrance of the Guadalquivir and the coast of southern al-Andalus, after which Viking fleets had difficulties battling the Andalusī armada.

[ 136 ] Gwyn Jones writes that this Viking raid had occurred on 1 October 844, when most of the Iberian peninsula was controlled by the emirate. His account says a flotilla of about 80 Viking ships, after attacking Asturias, Galicia and Lisbon, had ascended the Guadalquivir to Išbīliya , and besieged it for seven days , inflicting many casualties and taking numerous hostages with the intent to ransom them. Another group of Vikings had gone to Qādis ( Cádiz ) to plunder while those in Išbīliya waited on Qubtil ( Isla Menor ), an island in the river, for the ransom money to arrive.

[ 138 ] Meantime, the emir of Qurṭuba, Abd ar-Rahman II , prepared a military contingent to meet them, and on 11 November a pitched battle ensued on the grounds of Talayata (Tablada).

[ 139 ] The Vikings held their ground, but the results were catastrophic for the invaders, who suffered a thousand casualties; four hundred were captured and executed, some thirty ships were destroyed.

[ 140 ] It was not a total victory for the emir's forces, but the Viking survivors had to negotiate a peace to leave the area, surrendering their plunder and the hostages they had taken to sell as slaves, in exchange for food and clothing. According to the Arabist Lévi-Provençal , over time, the few Norse survivors converted to Islam and settled as farmers in the area of Qawra , Qarmūnâ , and Moron , where they engaged in animal husbandry and made dairy products (reputedly the origin of Sevillian cheese).

[ 141 ] [ 142 ] Knutson and Caitlin write that Lévi-Provençal offered no sources for the proposition of conversion to Islam by northern Europeans in al-Andalus and thus it "remains unsubstantiated".

[ 143 ] By the year 859 a large Viking force again invaded al-Andalus, beginning a campaign along the coast of the Iberian Peninsula with smaller groups that assaulted various locations. They attacked Išbīliya (Seville), but were driven off and they returned down the Guadalquivir to the Strait of Gibraltar. The Vikings then sailed round Cape Gata and followed the coastline to the Kūra (cora) of Tudmir , raiding various settlements, as mentioned by the 10th-century historian Ibn Hayyān . They finally ventured inland, entering the mouth of the river Segura and sailing towards ḥiṣn Ūriyūla ( Orihuela ), whose inhabitants had fled. The assailants sacked this important town, and according to the Arab sources, they attacked the fortress and burnt it to the ground. There is only brief mention in the historical record of this Viking army's attacks on south-eastern al-Andalus, including at al-Jazīra al-Khadrā ( Algeciras ), Ūriyūla , and the Juzur al-Balyār (جزُر البليار) ( Balearic Islands ).

[ 136 ] Ibn Hayyān wrote about the Viking campaign of 859–861 in al-Andalus, perhaps relying on the account given by  Muslim historian Aḥmad al-Rāzī , who tells of a Viking fleet of sixty-two ships that sailed up to Išbīliya and occupied al-Jazīra al-Khadrā . The Muslims seized two of their ships, laden with goods and coins, off the coast of Shidūnah ( Sidonia ). The ships were destroyed and their Viking crews killed. The remaining vessels continued up the Atlantic coast and landed near ( Pampeluna ), called Banbalūna in Arabic, [ 144 ] where they took their emir Gharsīa ibn Wanaqu ( García Iñiquez ) prisoner until in 861 he was ransomed for 70,000 dinars .

[ 145 ] According to the Annales Bertiniani , Danish Vikings embarked on a long voyage in 859, sailing eastward through the Strait of Gibraltar then up the river Rhône , where they raided monasteries and towns and established a base in the Camargue .

[ 146 ] Afterwards they raided Nakūr in what is now Morocco, kidnapped women of the royal family, and returned them when the emir of Córdoba paid their ransoms.

[ 147 ] The Vikings made several incursions in the years 859, 966 and 971, with intentions more diplomatic than bellicose, although an invasion in 971 was repelled when the Viking fleet was totally annihilated.

[ 148 ] Vikings attacked Talayata again in 889 at the instigation of Kurayb ibn Khaldun of Išbīliya. In 1015, a Viking fleet entered the river Minho and sacked the episcopal city of Tui Galicia; no new bishop was appointed until 1070.

[ 149 ] Portugal [ edit ] In 844, a fleet of several dozen Viking longships with square brown sails appeared in the Mar da Palha ("Sea of Straw"), i.e., the mouth of the river Tagus .

[ 150 ] At the time, the city later called Lisbon was under Muslim rule and known in Arabic as al-Us̲h̲būna or al-ʾIšbūnah (الأشبونة).

[ 151 ] [ 123 ] : 108–109 After a thirteen-day siege in which they plundered the surrounding countryside, the Vikings conquered al-Us̲h̲būna , but eventually retreated in the face of continued resistance by the townspeople led by their governor, Wahb Allah ibn Hazm.

[ 152 ] [ 153 ] [ 154 ] The chronicler Ibn Hayyān, who wrote the most reliable early history of al-Andalus, in his Kitāb almuqtabis , quoted the Muslim historian Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Rāzī: At the end of the year 229/844, the ships of the Norsemen [ al-Urdumaniyin ], who were known in al-Andalus as majus, appeared off the western coast of al-Andalus, landing at Lisbon, their first point of entry to the forbidden lands. It was a Wednesday, the first day of Dhu al-Hijjah [20 August] in that year, and they remained there thirteen days, during which time they engaged in three battles with the Muslims.

[ 155 ] North America [ edit ] Greenland [ edit ] The last written records of the Norse Greenlanders are from a 1408 marriage in the Church of Hvalsey .

The Viking-Age settlements in Greenland were established in the sheltered fjords of the southern and western coast. They settled in three separate areas along roughly 650 km (350 nmi ; 400 mi ) of the western coast. While harsh, the microclimates along some fjords allowed for a pastoral lifestyle similar to that of Iceland, until the climate changed for the worse with the Little Ice Age c.

1400 .

[ 156 ] The Eastern Settlement : The remains of about 450 farms have been found here. Erik the Red settled at Brattahlid on Ericsfjord.

The Middle Settlement , near modern Ivigtut , consisted of about 20 farms.

The Western Settlement at modern Godthåbsfjord , was established before the 12th century. It has been extensively excavated by archaeologists.

Mainland North America [ edit ] Main article: L'Anse aux Meadows According to carbon-dating of excavated remains, between 990 and 1050 CE Vikings established a small settlement on the northern peninsula of present-day Newfoundland , near L'Anse aux Meadows . Conflict with indigenous peoples and lack of support from Greenland brought the Vinland colony to an end within a few years. The archaeological remains are now a UNESCO World Heritage Site .

[ 157 ] Technology [ edit ] Modern replica of a Viking longship Further information: Longship and Viking Age arms and armour Viking naval technology was among the most advanced in all societies of the time; their other technological works were also well-regarded. The Vikings were equipped with the technologically superior longships; for purposes of conducting trade however, another type of ship, the knarr , wider and deeper in draft, were customarily used. The Vikings were competent sailors, adept in land warfare as well as at sea, and they often struck at accessible and poorly defended targets, usually with near impunity. The effectiveness of these tactics earned Vikings a formidable reputation as raiders and pirates.

The Vikings used their longships to travel vast distances and attain certain tactical advantages in battle. They could perform highly efficient hit-and-run attacks, in which they quickly approached a target, then left as rapidly as possible before a counter-offensive could be launched. Because of the ships' negligible draft, the Vikings could sail in shallow waters, allowing them to invade far inland along rivers. The ships were agile, and light enough to be carried over land from one river system to another. "Under sail, the same boats could tackle open water and cross the unexplored wastes of the North Atlantic." [ 158 ] The ships' speed was also prodigious for the time, estimated at a maximum of 14–15 knots (26–28 km/h). The use of the longships ended when technology changed, and ships began to be constructed using saws instead of axes, resulting in inferior vessels.

While battles at sea were rare, they would occasionally occur when Viking ships attempted to board European merchant vessels in Scandinavian waters. When larger scale battles ensued, Viking crews would rope together all nearby ships and slowly proceed towards the enemy targets. While advancing, the warriors hurled spears, arrows, and other projectiles at the opponents. When the ships were sufficiently close, melee combat would ensue using axes, swords, and spears until the enemy ship could be easily boarded. The roping technique allowed Viking crews to remain strong in numbers and act as a unit, but this uniformity also created problems. A Viking ship in the line could not retreat or pursue hostile ships without breaking the formation and cutting the ropes, which weakened the overall Viking fleet and was a burdensome task to perform in the heat of battle. In general, these tactics enabled Vikings to quickly destroy the meagre opposition posted during raids.

[ 159 ] Together with an increasing centralisation of government in the Scandinavian countries, the old system of leidang —a fleet mobilisation system, where every skipreide (ship community) had to maintain one ship and a crew—was discontinued as a purely military institution, as the duty to build and man a ship soon was converted into a tax. The Norwegian leidang was called under Haakon Haakonson for his 1263 expedition to Scotland during the Scottish–Norwegian War, and the last recorded calling of it was in 1603. However, already by the 11th and 12th centuries, perhaps in response to the longships, European fighting ships were built with raised platforms fore and aft, from which archers could shoot down into the relatively low longships. This led to the defeat of longship navies in most subsequent naval engagements—e.g., with the Hanseatic League.

The Vikings were also said to have fine weapons. Generally, Vikings used axes as weapons due to the lessened amount of iron required for their creations; swords were typically seen as a mark of wealth. Spears were also a common weapon among Vikings. Great amounts of time and artistry were expended in the creation of Viking weapons; ornamentation is commonly seen among them.

[ 160 ] Scandinavian architecture during the Viking Age most often involved wood, due to the abundance of the material.

Longhouses , a form of home, often featuring ornamentation, are commonly seen as the defining building of the Viking Age.

[ 161 ] Exactly how the Vikings navigated the open seas with such success is unclear. A study published by the Royal Society in its journal, Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical and Physical Sciences , suggests that the Vikings made use of an optical compass as a navigation aid, using the light-splitting and polarisation-filtering properties of Iceland spar to find the location of the sun when it was not directly visible.

[ 162 ] While some evidence points to such use of calcite "sunstones" to find the sun's location, modern reproductions of Viking "sky-polarimetric" navigation have found these sun compasses to be highly inaccurate, and not usable in cloudy or foggy weather.

[ 163 ] The archaeological find known as the Visby lenses from the Swedish island of Gotland may be components of a telescope . It appears to date from long before the invention of the telescope in the 17th century.

[ 164 ] Religion [ edit ] See also: Norse paganism and Norse mythology For most of the Viking Age, Scandinavian society generally followed Norse paganism. The traditions of this faith, including Valhalla and the Æsir , are sometimes cited as a factor in the creation of Viking warrior culture.

[ 165 ] However, Scandinavia was eventually Christianised towards the later Viking Age, with early centres of Christianity especially in Denmark.

Trade [ edit ] A typical fortified Viking town. This is a model of the town of Aros c.

950 . The town is now known as Aarhus Model of the fortified Viking Age town of Aros Some of the most important trading ports founded by the Norse during the period include both existing and former cities such as Aarhus (Denmark), Ribe (Denmark), Hedeby (Germany), Vineta (Pomerania), Truso (Poland), Bjørgvin (Norway), Kaupang (Norway), Skiringssal (Norway), Birka (Sweden), Bordeaux (France), York (England), Dublin (Ireland) and Aldeigjuborg (Russia).

[ 166 ] As Viking ships carried cargo and trade goods throughout the Baltic area and beyond, their active trading centres grew into thriving towns.

[ 167 ] One important centre of trade was at Hedeby . Close to the border with the Franks, it was effectively a crossroads between the cultures, until its eventual destruction by the Norwegians in an internecine dispute around 1050.

York was the centre of the kingdom of Jórvík from 866, and discoveries there (e.g., a silk cap, a counterfeit of a coin from Samarkand, and a cowry shell from the Red Sea or the Persian Gulf ) suggest that Scandinavian trade connections in the 10th century reached beyond Byzantium . However, those items could also have been Byzantine imports, and there is no reason to assume that the Varangians travelled significantly beyond Byzantium and the Caspian Sea .

Viking trade routes extended far beyond Scandinavia. As Scandinavian ships penetrated southward on the rivers of Eastern Europe to acquire financial capital, they encountered the nomad peoples of the steppes, leading to the beginning of a trading system that connected Russia and Scandinavia with the northern routes of the Eurasian Silk Road network.

[ 168 ] During the Middle Ages , the Volga trade route connected Northern Europe and Northwestern Russia with the Caspian Sea , via the Volga River . The international trade routes that enabled the passage of goods by ship from Scandinavia to the east were mentioned in early medieval literature as the Austrrvegr passing through the eastern Baltic region. Ships headed to the river Volga sailed through the Gulf of Finland , while those destined for Byzantium might take one of several routes through present-day north-eastern Poland or the Baltic lands.

[ 169 ] The Vikings catered to the demand for slaves in the southern slave markets in the Orthodox Eastern Roman Empire and the Muslim Umayyad Caliphate , both of whom desired slaves of a religion different from their own.

[ 170 ] The trade route from the Varangians to the Greeks connected Scandinavia , Kievan Rus' and the Eastern Roman Empire . The Rus' were of note as merchants who supplied honey, wax, and slaves to Constantinople.

[ 171 ] The Varangians served as mercenaries of Russian princes, then of the Swedish princes who founded and ruled Norse kingdoms in Eastern Europe such as at Kiev and Novgorod.

[ 172 ] Culture [ edit ] The Viking Age saw many of the earliest Scandinavian cultural developments. The traditional Icelandic Sagas , still often read today, are seen as characteristic literary works of Northern Europe.

Old English works such as Beowulf , written in the tradition of Germanic heroic legend , show Viking influences; in Beowulf , this influence is seen in the language and setting of the poem. Another example of Viking Age cultural influence is the Old Norse influence in the English language ; this influence is primarily a legacy of the various Viking invasions of England.

[ 173 ] Women in Viking society [ edit ] According to archaeologist Liv Helga Dommasnes writing in 1998, although archaeological sources pertinent to the study of women's roles in Scandinavia were most plentiful from the Viking Age compared to other historical eras, not many archaeologists took advantage of the opportunities they represented. She alludes to the fact that the picture commonly presented of Viking society during the Viking Age was of a society of men engaged in their various occupations or positions, with scant mention of the women and children who were also part of it.

[ 174 ] In her reckoning, given this basic flaw in the modern image of Viking society, how knowledge of the past is organised must be considered. Accordingly, language is an essential part of this organisation of knowledge, and the concepts of modern languages are tools for understanding the realities of the past and for organising that knowledge, even though they are artefacts of our own time and perceived reality. Written sources, although scarce, appear to have been prioritised, even though it is understood that these written sources are biased. Almost all of them originate from other cultures, as literature from Viking societies is sparse. Since it unambiguously transmits meaning in literary terms, it is fairly clear that this meaning is not derived from the ideology of Viking Age people, but rather from that of early northern Christianity.

Medieval studies scholar Gro Steinsland argues that the transformation from heathen to Christian religion in Viking society was a "radical break" rather than a gradual transition, and Dommasnes says this should have bearing on consideration of the transformation of late Viking Age traditions before they were recorded in 12th- or 13th-century literature. By this reasoning, changing cultural values necessarily greatly affected perceptions of women particularly and of gender roles generally.

[ 174 ] Judith Jesch , professor of Viking Age studies at the University of Nottingham , suggests in her Women in the Viking Age that "If historians' emphasis on vikings as warriors made invisible the women in the background, then it is not always clear where the more visible female counterparts of the new urban vikings have come from." She says it is impossible to study the Vikings without a conception of the entire historical period they lived in, of the culture that produced them, and of other cultures they influenced. By her lights, not accounting for the doings of half the population would be ludicrous.

[ 175 ] Published in 1991, Women in the Viking Age develops Jesch's thesis that the texts of the Icelandic sagas ( Íslendingasögur ) are recordings of mythological narratives preserved in the forms in which they were written by 13th-century antiquaries in Iceland. They cannot be interpreted literally as the "authentic voice of Vikings", embodying as they do the preconceptions of those medieval Icelanders. These sagas, formerly believed to have been based on actual historical traditions, are now commonly regarded as imaginative creations. With their origins in oral traditions, there is little confidence in them as historical truth, but they express what they tell more directly than "the dry bones of archaeology" or the brief messages on runestones. The modern view of the Viking Age is completely entwined with knowledge imparted by the sagas, and they are the main source of a broadly held belief that women in the Viking Age were independent, assertive, and had agency .

[ 3 ] Jesch describes the content of runic inscriptions as connecting people who live in modern times with women of the Viking Age similarly to archaeological evidence, often telling more about the lives of women than the material remains revealed in archaeological excavations . She considers these inscriptions as contemporary evidence originating within the culture instead of from the incomplete or prejudiced viewpoint of the cultural outsider, and sees most of them as narratives in a narrow sense that supply details illuminating the overall picture derived from archaeological sources. They allow actual persons to be identified and reveal information about them such as their family relationships, their names, and perhaps facts concerning their individual lives.

[ 176 ] Birgit Sawyer says her book The Viking-age Rune-stones aims to show that the corpus of runestones considered as a whole is a fruitful source of knowledge about the religious, political, social, and economic history of Scandinavia in the 10th and 11th centuries. Using data from her database she finds that runestones cast light on settlement patterns, communications, kinship and naming customs, and the evolution of language and poetry. Systematically researching the material leads to her hypothesis that runic inscriptions mirrored inheritance customs entailing not only lands or goods, but also rights, obligations, and rank in society.

[ 177 ] Although women in Viking society, like men, had tombstones over their graves, runestones were raised primarily to memorialise men, with the lives of few women being commemorated by runestones (Sawyer says only 7 per cent), and half of those were with men. Because there was a much larger per centage of women's graves with rich appointments in the Iron Age, the comparatively smaller number of runestones memorialising women indicates that the trend reflects changes in burial customs and religion only in part. Most of those honoured with runestones were men, and the emphasis was on those who sponsored the monuments. Typical medieval grave monuments name only the deceased, but Viking Age runestones prioritise the sponsors, first and foremost; therefore, they "are monuments to the living as much as to the dead ".

[ 178 ] Language [ edit ] The 12th-century Icelandic Gray Goose Laws ( Icelandic : grágás ) state that Swedes, Norwegians, Icelanders, and Danes spoke the same language, dǫnsk tunga ("Danish tongue"; speakers of Old East Norse would have said dansk tunga ). Another term was norrœnt mál ("northern speech"). Old Norse has developed into the modern North Germanic languages : Icelandic , Faroese , Norwegian , Danish , Swedish , and other North Germanic varieties of which Norwegian, Danish and Swedish retain considerable mutual intelligibility while Icelandic remains the closest to Old Norse. In present-day Iceland schoolchildren are able to read the 12th-century Icelandic sagas in the original language (in editions with normalised spelling).

[ 179 ] Written sources of Old Norse from the Viking Age are rare: there are rune stones , but the inscriptions are mostly short. A good deal of the vocabulary, morphology , and phonology of the runic inscriptions (little is known definitely about their syntax) "can be shown to develop regularly into Viking-Age, medieval and modern Scandinavian reflexes ", says Michael Barnes.

[ 180 ] According to David Arter, Old Norse was for a while during the Viking Age a lingua franca spoken not just in Scandinavia but also in the courts of the Scandinavian rulers in Ireland, Scotland, England, France and Russia. The Norse origin of some words used today is obvious, as in the word haar referring to the cold sea mist on the east coast of Scotland and England; [ 181 ] it derives from the Old Norse haárr .

[ 182 ] Old Norse influence on other languages [ edit ] The long-term linguistic effects of the Viking settlements in England were threefold: over a thousand Old Norse words eventually became part of Standard English ; numerous places in the East and North-east of England have Danish names, and many English personal names are of Scandinavian origin.

[ 183 ] Scandinavian words that entered the English language included landing, score, beck, fellow, take, busting , and steersman .

[ 183 ] The vast majority of loan words did not appear in documents until the early 12th century; these included many modern words which used sk- sounds, such as skirt, sky, and skin ; other words appearing in written sources at this time included again, awkward, birth, cake, dregs, fog, freckles, gasp, law, moss, neck, ransack, root, scowl, sister, seat, sly, smile, want, weak and window from Old Norse meaning "wind-eye".

[ 183 ] Some of the words that came into use are among the most common in English, such as to go, to come, to sit, to listen, to eat, both, same, get and give . The system of personal pronouns was affected, with they, them and their replacing the earlier forms. Old Norse influenced the verb to be ; the replacement of sindon by are is almost certainly Scandinavian in origin, as is the third-person-singular ending -s in the present tense of verbs.

[ 183 ] There are more than 1,500 Scandinavian place names in England, mainly in Yorkshire and Lincolnshire (within the former boundaries of the Danelaw ): over 600 end in -by , the Scandinavian word for "village"—for example Grimsby, Naseby , and Whitby ; [ 184 ] many others end in -thorpe ("farm"), -thwaite ("clearing"), and -toft ("homestead").

[ 183 ] According to an analysis of names ending in -son , the distribution of family names showing Scandinavian influence is still concentrated in the north and east, corresponding to areas of former Viking settlement. Early medieval records indicate that over 60% of personal names in Yorkshire and North Lincolnshire showed Scandinavian influence.

[ 183 ] Genetics [ edit ] A genetic study published at bioRxiv in July 2019 and in Nature in September 2020 examined the population genomics of the Viking Age. The remains of four hundred forty-two ancient humans from across Europe and the North Atlantic were surveyed, stretching from the Bronze Age to the early modern period . In terms of Y-DNA composition, Viking individuals were similar to present-day Scandinavians. The most common Y-DNA haplogroup in the study was I1 (95 samples), R1b (84 samples) and R1a , especially (but not exclusively) of the Scandinavian R1a-Z284 subclade (61 samples). It was found that there was a notable foreign gene flow into Scandinavia in the years preceding the Viking Age and during the Viking Age itself. This gene flow entered Denmark and eastern Sweden , from which it spread into the rest of Scandinavia. The Y-DNA of Viking Age samples suggests that this may partly have been descendants of the Germanic tribes from the Migration Period returning to Scandinavia. The study also found that despite close cultural similarities, there were distinct genetic differences between regional populations in the Viking Age. These differences have persisted into modern times. Inland areas were found to be more genetically homogenous than coastal areas and islands such as Öland and Gotland . These islands were probably important trade settlements. Consistent with historical records, the study found evidence of a major influx of Danish Viking ancestry into England, a Swedish influx into Estonia and Finland; and Norwegian influx into Ireland, Iceland and Greenland during the Viking Age. The Vikings were found to have left a profound genetic imprint in the areas they settled, which has persisted into modern times with, e.g., the contemporary population of the United Kingdom having up to 6% Viking DNA. The study also showed that some local people of Scotland were buried as Vikings and may have taken on Viking identities.

Margaryan et al. 2020 examined the skeletal remains of 42 individuals from the Salme ship burials in Estonia. The skeletal remains belonged to warriors killed in battle who were later buried together with numerous valuable weapons and armour. DNA testing and isotope analysis revealed that the men came from central Sweden.

Margaryan et al. 2020 examined an elite warrior burial from Bodzia (Poland) dated to 1010–1020. The cemetery in Bodzia is exceptional in terms of Scandinavian and Kievian Rus links. The Bodzia man (sample VK157, or burial E864/I) was not a simple warrior from the princely retinue, but he belonged to the princely family himself. His burial is the richest one in the whole cemetery; moreover, strontium analysis of his teeth enamel shows he was not local. It is assumed that he came to Poland with the Prince of Kiev, Sviatopolk the Accursed , and met a violent death in combat. This corresponds to the events of 1018 when Sviatopolk himself disappeared after having retreated from Kiev to Poland. It cannot be excluded that the Bodzia man was Sviatopolk himself, as the genealogy of the Rurikids at this period is extremely dubious, and the dates of birth of many princes of this dynasty may be quite approximative. The Bodzia man carried haplogroup I1- S2077 and had both Scandinavian ancestry and Russian admixture.

[ 185 ] [ 186 ] [ 187 ] The genetic data from these areas affirmed conclusions previously drawn from historical and archaeological evidence.

[ 185 ] [ 188 ] Settlements outside Scandinavia [ edit ] Atlantic [ edit ] Faroe Islands Iceland Greenland Baltic [ edit ] Seeburg (Latvia) Polange (Lithuania) British Isles [ edit ] England [ edit ] Danelaw Jórvík ( York ) Cumbria Ireland [ edit ] Arklow Dyflin ( Dublin ) Hlymrekr ( Limerick ) Veðrafjǫrðr ( Waterford ) Víkingr-ló ( Wicklow ) [ 189 ] Veisafjǫrðr ( Wexford ) Isle of Man [ edit ] Mann Scotland [ edit ] Caithness Galloway Kintyre Norðreyjar ( Orkney and Shetland ) Ross Suðreyjar ( Hebrides ) Sutherland Eastern Europe [ edit ] Garðaríki Western Europe [ edit ] Normandy North America [ edit ] Norse colonisation of the Americas L'Anse aux Meadows (and possibly a larger area called Vinland ) Notes [ edit ] ^ Mawer, Allen (1913).

The Vikings .

Cambridge University Press . p.

1 .

ISBN 095173394X .

The term 'Viking' is derived from the Old Norse vík , a bay, and means 'one who haunts a bay, creek or fjord'. In the 9th and 10th centuries, it came to be used more especially of those warriors who left their homes in Scandinavia and made raids on the chief European countries. This is the narrow, and technically the only correct use of the term 'Viking', but in such expressions as 'Viking civilisation', 'the Viking Age', 'the Viking movement', 'Viking influence', the word has come to have a wider significance and is used as a concise and convenient term for describing the whole of the civilisation, activity and influence of the Scandinavian peoples, at a particular period in their history...

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Sawyer, Peter H.

(1995).

Scandinavians and the English in the Viking Age .

University of Cambridge . p. 3.

ISBN 095173394X .

Archived from the original on 23 April 2023 . Retrieved 5 September 2019 .

The Viking period is, therefore, best defined as the period when Scandinavians played a large role in the British Isles and western Europe as raiders and conquerors. It is also the period in which Scandinavians settled in many of the areas they conquered, and in the Atlantic islands...

^ a b c Jesch, Judith (1991).

Women in the Viking Age .

Boydell & Brewer Ltd . p. 84.

ISBN 0851153607 .

International contact is the key to the Viking Age. In Scandinavian history, this period is distinct because large numbers of Scandinavian people left their homelands and voyaged abroad... The period is thus defined by the impact the Scandinavians had on the world around them.

^ • Haywood, John (1995).

The Penguin Historical Atlas of the Vikings .

Penguin Books . p.

8 .

ISBN 0140513280 .

The term "Viking" has come to be applied to all Scandinavians of the period, but in the Viking Age itself the term víkingr applied only to someone who went í víking , that is plundering. In this sense, most Viking-age Scandinavians were not Vikings at all, but peaceful farmers and craftsmen who stayed quietly at home all their lives." • Haywood, John (1999).

The Vikings .

Sutton . p. 37.

ISBN 0750921943 .

Archived from the original on 4 October 2023 . Retrieved 3 January 2020 .

The term 'Viking' has come in modern times to be applied to all early medieval Scandinavians and it is directly as a result of this that the controversy has arisen. As used originally in the Viking Age itself, the word was applied only to someone who went i viking, that is someone whose occupation was piracy. The earliest use of the word predates the Viking Age by some years and it was not even used exclusively to describe Scandinavian pirates. Most Viking Age Scandinavians were not Vikings at all in this original sense of the word but were simply peaceful farmers, craftsmen and merchants." • Wilson, David M.

(2008).

The Vikings in the Isle of Man .

Aarhus University Press . p. 11.

ISBN 978-8779343672 .

Archived from the original on 4 October 2023 . Retrieved 3 January 2020 .

The word 'Viking' did not come into general use in the English language until the middle of the nineteenth Century—at about the same time that it was introduced into serious academic literature in Scandinavia—and has since then changed its meaning and been much abused. It must, however, be accepted that the term is today used throughout the world as a descriptor of the peoples of Scandinavia in the period from the late eighth Century until the mid-eleventh Century.

• Rogers, Clifford J.

, ed. (2010).

"Vikings" .

The Oxford Encyclopedia of Medieval Warfare and Military Technology .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780195338423 .

Archived from the original on 23 May 2020 . Retrieved 3 January 2020 .

"Vikings" is the usual generic term given today to all Scandinavians of the Viking Age ^ Davies, Caroline (21 October 2021).

"Solar storm confirms Vikings settled in North America exactly 1,000 years ago" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 7 November 2021 . Retrieved 21 October 2021 .

^ Simek, Rudolf (2005) "The Emergence of the Viking Age: Circumstances and Conditions", "The Vikings first Europeans VIII – XI century – The New Discoveries of Archaeology", other, pp. 24–25 ^ a b c d e Jesch, Judith (2015).

The Viking Diaspora . Routledge. pp.

8– 10.

ISBN 978-1-317-48253-6 .

^ "History of Lindisfarne Priory" . English Heritage.

Archived from the original on 7 March 2016 . Retrieved 3 March 2016 .

^ a b Swanton, Michael (1998).

The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle . Psychology Press.

ISBN 0-415-92129-5 . p. 57, n. 15.

^ Stefan Brink; Neil Price (2008).

The Viking World . Routledge. p. 195.

ISBN 978-020341277-0 .

^ Albert D'Haenens, Les Invasions Normandes en Belgique au IX Siecle (Louvain 1967) asserts that the phrase cannot be documented. It is asserted that the closest documented phrase is a sentence from an antiphon for churches dedicated to St. Vaast or St. Medard: Summa pia gratia nostra conservando corpora et cutodita, de gente fera Normannica nos libera, quae nostra vastat, Deus, regna , "Our supreme and holy Grace, protecting us and ours, deliver us, God, from the savage race of Northmen which lays waste our realms." Magnus Magnusson, Vikings!

(New York: E.P. Dutton 1980), ISBN 0-525-22892-6 , p. 61.

^ Jones 1968 , p. 195. Simeon of Durham recorded the raid in these terms: And they came to the church of Lindisfarne, laid everything waste with grievous plundering, trampled the holy places with polluted feet, dug up the altars, and seized all the treasures of the holy church. They killed some of the brothers; some they took away with them in fetters; many they drove out, naked and loaded with insults; and some they drowned in the sea." Magnus Magnusson, Vikings!

, p. 32.

^ Battles, Dominique (2013).

Cultural Difference and Material Culture in Middle English Romance: Normans and Saxons . Routledge. p. 168.

ISBN 978-1-136-15662-5 .

^ Wawn, Andrew (2001).

"BBC – History – Ancient History in depth: The Viking Revival" .

www.bbc.co.uk .

Archived from the original on 11 March 2008 . Retrieved 4 August 2024 .

^ Palmer, Alan Warwick (2006).

Northern Shores: a history of the Baltic Sea and its peoples . London: John Murray. p. 21.

ISBN 978-0-7195-6299-0 .

OCLC 63398802 .

^ Arne Emil Christensen Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine , The Vikings .

^ Wicker, Nancy (1998). Hallsal, Guy (ed.).

Selective female infanticide as partial explanation for dearth of women in Viking Age Scandinavia . Woodbridge: Boydell press. pp.

205– 221.

ISBN 978-0-85115-713-9 .

Archived from the original on 4 October 2023 . Retrieved 15 December 2017 .

^ a b Lund, Julie; Sindbæk, Søren M. (15 May 2021).

"Crossing the Maelstrom: New Departures in Viking Archaeology" .

Journal of Archaeological Research .

30 (2): 172.

doi : 10.1007/s10814-021-09163-3 .

hdl : 10852/89013 .

ISSN 1573-7756 .

^ a b Barrett, James H. (1 September 2008). "What caused the Viking Age?".

Antiquity .

82 (317): 672– 673.

doi : 10.1017/S0003598X00097301 .

^ a b Bagge, Sverre (2014).

Cross and Scepter: The Rise of the Scandinavian Kingdoms from the Vikings to the Reformation . Princeton University Press. pp.

24– 25.

ISBN 978-1-4008-5010-5 .

^ Ferguson, Robert (2009).

The Vikings: A History . Penguin. p. 47.

ISBN 978-1-101-15142-6 .

^ Fletcher, Richard.

Roman–Britain and Anglo–Saxon England 55 BC–AD 1066 . Mechanicsburg, 2002, 177 ^ a b Winroth, Anders (2016).

The Age of the Vikings . Princeton University Press. pp.

51– 52.

ISBN 978-0-691-16929-3 .

^ Ferguson, Robert.

The Vikings: A History . New York: Viking, 2009. Print., 48 [ ISBN missing ] ^ Hansen, I.L & C. Wickham.

The Long Eighth Century: Production, Distribution, and Demand.

Leiden: Brill, 2000.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Bruno Dumézil, master of Conference at Paris X–Nanterre, Normalien, aggregated history, author of conversion and freedom in the barbarian kingdoms. 5th – 8th centuries (Fayard, 2005) ^ "Franques Royal Annals" cited in Sawyer, Peter (2001) The Oxford Illustrated History of the Vikings .

ISBN 0-19-285434-8 . p. 20 ^ Decaux, Alain and Castelot, André (1981) Dictionnaire d'histoire de France . Perrin.

ISBN 2-7242-3080-9 . pp. 184–185 ^ Boyer, R. (2008) Les Vikings: histoire, mythes, dictionnaire . R. Laffont.

ISBN 978-2-221-10631-0 . p. 96 ^ François-Xavier Dillmann , "Viking civilisation and culture. A bibliography of French-language", Caen, Centre for research on the countries of the North and Northwest, University of Caen, 1975, p. 19, and" Les Vikings – the Scandinavian and European 800–1200 ", 22nd exhibition of art from the Council of Europe, 1992, p. 26 ^ Barrett, James H. "What Caused the Viking Age?" Antiquity 82.317 (2008): 671–685 [678–679] ^ Ferguson, Robert.

The Vikings: A History . New York: Viking, 2009. p. 58 ^ Pearson, Andrew.

Piracy in Late Roman Britain: A Perspective from the Viking Age . Britannia 37 (2006): Web.

^ Winroth, Anders (2016).

The Age of the Vikings . Princeton University Press. p. 72.

ISBN 978-0-691-16929-3 .

^ a b Price, T. Douglas (2015).

Ancient Scandinavia: An Archaeological History from the First Humans to the Vikings . Oxford University Press. pp.

321– 322.

ISBN 978-0-19-023199-6 .

Archived from the original on 4 October 2023 . Retrieved 25 July 2021 .

^ Carroll, Jayne (2014).

"Viking wars and The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" . In Allard, Joe; North, Richard (eds.).

Beowulf and Other Stories: A New Introduction to Old English, Old Icelandic and Anglo-Norman Literatures . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-86041-9 .

^ Loyn, Henry (1995).

The Vikings in Britain . John Wiley & Sons. p. 38.

ISBN 978-0-631-18711-0 .

^ "The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle: Part 2" . Medieval and Classical Literature Library.

Archived from the original on 13 April 2018 . Retrieved 7 June 2011 .

^ a b c d Bagge, Sverre (2014).

Cross and Scepter: The Rise of the Scandinavian Kingdoms from the Vikings to the Reformation . Princeton University Press. pp.

21– 22.

ISBN 978-1-4008-5010-5 .

Archived from the original on 23 April 2023 . Retrieved 25 July 2021 .

^ The material suggesting a Norwegian origin identifies him with Hrolf the Ganger , also known as "Rolf the Walker" ^ Howard, Ian (2003).

Swein Forkbeard's Invasions and the Danish Conquest of England, 991–1017 . Woodbridge: Boydell Press. p. 26.

ISBN 0-85115-928-1 .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2023 . Retrieved 16 October 2021 .

^ Winroth, Anders (2016).

The Age of the Vikings . Princeton University Press. p. 143.

ISBN 978-0-691-16929-3 .

^ Somerville, Angus A.; McDonald, R. Andrew, eds. (2019).

"The End of the Viking Age" .

The Viking Age: A Reader (3rd ed.). University of Toronto Press. p. 451.

ISBN 978-1-4875-7047-7 .

^ Bagge, Sverre (2012).

From Viking Stronghold to Christian Kingdom: State Formation in Norway, c. 900–1350 . Museum Tusculanum Press. pp.

29– 30.

ISBN 978-87-635-0791-2 .

^ McDonald, R. Andrew (2020).

The Sea Kings: The Late Norse Kingdoms of Man and the Isles c. 1066–1275 . Birlinn Ltd. p. 221.

ISBN 978-1-78885-148-0 .

^ a b Hall 2010 , p. 13.

^ Sweyn (r. 1013–1014) , The Official Website Of The British Monarchy, archived from the original on 29 November 2014 , retrieved 16 November 2014 ^ Badsey, S. Nicolle, D, Turnbull, S (1999). "The Timechart of Military History". Worth Press Ltd, ISBN 1-903025-00-1 .

^ Lund, Niels (2001). "The Danish Empire and the End of the Viking Age", pp. 167–181 in The Oxford Illustrated History of the Vikings . Ed. P.H. Sawyer. Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-285434-8 .

^ Canute 'The Great' (r. 1016–1035) , The Official Website Of The British Monarchy, archived from the original on 29 November 2014 , retrieved 16 November 2014 ^ Lawson, M.K. (2004). "Cnut: England's Viking King 1016–35". The History Press Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-582-05970-2 .

^ Bagge, Sverre (2014).

Cross and Scepter: The Rise of the Scandinavian Kingdoms from the Vikings to the Reformation . Princeton University Press. p. 39.

ISBN 978-1-4008-5010-5 .

Archived from the original on 23 April 2023 . Retrieved 25 July 2021 .

^ Forte, Oram & Pedersen 2005 , p. 216.

^ Andrea Dolfini; Rachel J. Crellin; Christian Horn; Marion Uckelmann (2018).

Prehistoric Warfare and Violence: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches . Springer. p. 349.

ISBN 978-3-319-78828-9 .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2023 . Retrieved 30 April 2020 .

^ Ó Corráin, Donnchadh (2001), "The Vikings in Ireland", in Larsen, Anne-Christine (ed.), The Vikings in Ireland . The Viking Ship Museum, p. 19 ^ Ó Cróinín, Dáibhí.

Early Medieval Ireland 400–1200 . Taylor & Francis, 2016. p. 267 ^ Ó Corráin, "The Vikings in Ireland", pp. 28–29.

^ Ó Corráin, "The Vikings in Ireland", p. 20.

^ Downham, Clare (2007).

Viking Kings of Britain and Ireland: The Dynasty of Ívarr to A.D. 1014 .

Dunedin Academic Press . p. 26.

ISBN 978-1-903765-89-0 .

Archived from the original on 2 February 2023 . Retrieved 19 May 2020 .

^ Ó Corráin, "The Vikings in Ireland", p. 22.

^ Gorski, Richard.

Roles of the Sea in Medieval England . Boydell Press, 2012. p. 149 ^ Hudson, Benjamin T. "Sihtric (Sigtryggr Óláfsson, Sigtryggr Silkiskegg) (died 1042)".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/25545 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ Downham, Viking Kings of Britain and Ireland , pp. 51–52 ^ Downham, Viking Kings of Britain and Ireland , p. 61 ^ The Makers of Scotland: Picts, Romans, Gaels and Vikings , by Tim Clarkson, Birlinn Ltd, Edinburgh, 2013." ^ Hogan, C. Michael (2008) "Catto Long Barrow fieldnotes" Archived 18 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine .

The Modern Antiquarian ^ "Norsken som døde" Archived 24 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine .

Universitas – Kultur onsdag . 9 October 1996 ^ 1669 Act for annexation of Orkney and Shetland to the Crown Archived 18 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Shetland & Orkney Udal Law group ^ History and Heritage . Shetland Tourism ^ "Shetland Islands Council – Ports and Harbours" Archived 14 September 2010 at the Wayback Machine .

shetland.gov.uk .

^ Williams, John Garnons.

Wales at the Time of the Treaty of Montgomery in 1267 . Mapping Medieval Wales. gwp.enta.net ^ Tvauri 2012 , pp. 321–322, 325–326.

^ Frucht 2004 .

^ a b Enn Tarvel (2007).

Sigtuna hukkumine .

Archived 11 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine Haridus, 2007 (7–8), p 38–41 ^ Tvauri 2012 .

^ a b c Mägi 2015 , pp. 45–46.

^ Martens 2004 , pp. 132–135.

^ "Euratlas Periodis Web – Map of Europe in Year 800" .

Euratlas.net .

Archived from the original on 2 December 2018 . Retrieved 24 November 2018 .

^ Matthews, W. K. "Medieval Baltic Tribes". American Slavic and East European Review, Vol. 8, No. 2 (Apr. 1949), pp. 126–136.

^ Norna-Gests þáttr, c. 1157, Níkulás Bergsson, Iceland.

^ "Euratlas Periodis Web – Map of Grobina in Year 700" .

Euratlas.net .

Archived from the original on 6 November 2017 . Retrieved 24 November 2018 .

^ Mickevičius, Artūras (2018).

Vikingai Lietuvos istorijoje Archived 5 August 2023 at the Wayback Machine [ Vikings in the History of Lithuania ] (in Lithuanian). Versus. ISBN 978-9955829195.

^ Nikitenka, Denisas (2018).

Pilsoto žemės pilys (in Lithuanian). Mažosios Lietuvos istorijos muziejus.

ISBN 978-9986315056 .

^ Butrimas, Adomas.

Lietuva iki Mindaugo Archived 6 August 2023 at the Wayback Machine [ Lithuania Before Mindaugas ] (in Lithuanian). 2003, p. 136.

ISBN 9986571898 .

^ Thunberg, Carl L.

(2011).

Särkland och dess källmaterial [ Serkland and its Source Material ]. Göteborgs universitet.

ISBN 978-91-637-5727-3 .

^ "Oleg" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 11 October 2007 . Retrieved 3 August 2007 .

^ "Rurik" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 30 September 2007 . Retrieved 3 August 2007 .

^ Land of the Rus – Viking expeditions to the east Archived 28 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine National Museum of Denmark ^ Dangerous journeys to Eastern Europe and Russia Archived 28 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine National Museum of Denmark ^ Noonan, Thomas S. (2001).

"Scandinavians in European Russia" . In Sawyer, P.H. (ed.).

The Oxford Illustrated History of the Vikings . Oxford University Press. p. 138.

ISBN 978-0-19-285434-6 .

^ Mägi, Marika (2018).

In Austrvegr: The Role of the Eastern Baltic in Viking Age Communication across the Baltic Sea . BRILL. pp.

206– 207.

ISBN 978-90-04-36381-6 .

^ Bjerg, Line; Lind, John H.; Sindbæk, Søren Michael (2013). Bjerg, Line; Lind, John H.; Sindbæk, Søren Michael (eds.).

From Goths to Varangians: Communication and Cultural Exchange between the Baltic and the Black Sea . Aarhus Universitetsforlag. pp.

7– 8.

ISBN 978-87-7124-425-0 .

^ A massive majority (40,000) of all Viking Age Arabian coins found in Scandinavia were found in Gotland. In Skåne, Öland and Uppland together, about 12,000 coins were found. Other Scandinavian areas have only scattered finds: 1,000 from Denmark and some 500 from Norway.

Byzantine coins have been found almost exclusively in Gotland, some 400.

See: Burenhult, Göran (1999).

Arkeologi i Norden 2 [ Archeology in the Nordic countries, part 2 ] (in Swedish). Stockholm: Natur & Kultur .

ISBN 978-91-27-13478-2 .

See also: Gardell, Carl Johan (1987).

Gotlands historia i fickformat [ The pocket history of Gotland ] (in Swedish). Immenco.

ISBN 978-91-7810-885-5 .

^ Białobłocki, Tomasz (2018).

"The research on the origin of Russians and Ukrainians as the indicator of politicization of Russian national minority in Ukraine" (PDF) . Wyższej Szkoły Gospodarki Krajowej w Kutnie (University of National Economy in Kutno). pp.

85– 86 . Retrieved 5 August 2024 .

^ Thunberg, Carl L.

(2012).

Att tolka Svitjod [ To interpret Svitjod ]. Göteborgs universitet.

ISBN 978-91-981859-4-2 .

^ Blöndal, Sigfús (2007).

The Varangians of Byzantium . Cambridge University Press. p. 1.

ISBN 978-0-521-03552-1 .

^ Andersson, Thorsten (2007).

"Rus' und Wikinger" .

Arkiv för nordisk filologi (in German).

122 : 5– 9.

ISSN 0066-7668 .

^ Brink, Stefan (2008).

"Who were the Vikings?" . In Brink, Stefan; Price, Neil (eds.).

The Viking World . Routledge. p. 7.

ISBN 978-020341277-0 .

^ Jakobsson, Sverrir (2020).

The Varangians: In God's Holy Fire . Springer Nature. p. 73.

ISBN 978-3-030-53797-5 .

^ Jansson 1980 , p. 22.

^ a b Pritsak 1981 , p. 386.

^ "Nordiska språk", Nationalencyklopedin (in Swedish), § Historia , §§ Omkring 800–1100 , 1994 ^ Kempke 2001 , p. 17.

^ Jöns, Hauke; Kowalska, Anna (2020).

"Scandinavians on the Southern Baltic Coast" . In Aannestad, Hanne Lovise; Pedersen, Unn; Moen, Marianne; Naumann, Elise; Berg, Heidi Lund (eds.).

Vikings Across Boundaries: Viking-Age Transformations – Volume II . Routledge. p. 43.

ISBN 978-1-000-20470-4 .

^ Hinkkanen, Merja-Liisa; Kirby, David (2013).

"Boats and Ships" .

The Baltic and the North Seas . Routledge. p. 88.

ISBN 978-1-136-16954-0 .

^ a b c Kempke 2001 , p. 12.

^ a b c d e Kempke 2001 , p. 18.

^ Kempke 2001 , p. 15.

^ Herrmann, Joachim (1985) Die Slawen in Deutschland . Akademie-Verlag Berlin. pp. 237ff, 244ff ^ Kempke 2001 , pp. 15–16.

^ Kempke 2001 , p. 13.

^ Kempke 2001 , p. 16.

^ Lübke, Christian (2022).

"Adam of Bremen's View at the Polabian Slavs" . In Raffensperger, Christian (ed.).

Authorship, Worldview, and Identity in Medieval Europe . Routledge. p. 260.

ISBN 978-1-000-54834-1 .

^ Chartrand, René; Durham, Keith; Harrison, Mark; Heath, Ian (2016).

The Vikings . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 51.

ISBN 978-1-4728-1322-0 .

^ Sturlason, Snorre (2011).

Heimskringla – The Norse King Sagas . Read Books Ltd. p. 153.

ISBN 978-1-4465-4805-9 .

^ Hall 2010 , p. 17.

^ "Odo of West Francia" .

World History Encyclopedia .

Archived from the original on 16 April 2021 . Retrieved 23 April 2021 .

^ "Globetrotting Vikings: To the Gates of Paris" .

History Channel . 4 September 2018.

Archived from the original on 20 June 2020 . Retrieved 29 February 2020 .

^ "Robert I of France" .

Encyclopaedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 20 June 2020 . Retrieved 29 February 2020 .

^ "Robert 1 of France" .

Britannica Encyclopaedia .

Archived from the original on 20 June 2020 . Retrieved 29 February 2020 .

^ Tanner, J.R.; Previte-Orton, C.W.; Brook, Z.N.

Cambridge Medieval History (Volume 5, Chapter XV) . Cambridge University Press.

Archived from the original on 4 October 2023 . Retrieved 22 November 2020 .

^ Price, Neil (2008).

"Spain, North Africa and the Mediterranean" . In Brink, Stefan; Price, Neil (eds.).

The Viking World . Routledge. pp.

465– 466.

ISBN 978-1-134-31826-1 .

^ a b c Logan, F. Donald (2013).

The Vikings in History . Routledge. p. 110.

ISBN 978-1-136-52716-6 .

^ Haywood, John (2016).

Northmen: The Viking Saga, 793–1241 AD . Macmillan. pp.

138– 139.

ISBN 978-1-250-10615-5 .

^ Carr, John (30 April 2015).

Fighting Emperors of Byzantium . Pen and Sword. p. 177.

^ Hill, Paul (2015).

The Norman Commanders: Masters of Warfare 911–1135 . Pen and Sword. p. 18.

^ a b Anglo-Saxon Chronicles , p. 217; Florence of Worcester, p. 145 ^ 2. Runriket – Täby Kyrka Archived 4 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine , an online article at Stockholm County Museum, retrieved 1 July 2007.

^ Orkneyinga Saga, Anderson, Joseph, (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1873), FHL microfilm 253063, pp. 134, 139, 144–145, 149–151, 163, 193.

^ Translation based on Chibnall (ed.), Ecclesiastical History , vol. ii, pp. 203, 205 ^ Forte, Oram & Pedersen 2005 , p. 60.

^ "Los vikingos en Al-Andalus (abstract available in English)" (PDF) . Jesús Riosalido. 1997. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 July 2011 . Retrieved 11 May 2010 .

^ Price, Neil. Price, Neil; Eriksen, Marianne Hem; Jahnke, Carsten (eds.).

"From Nǫrvasund to Grikkland: The Vikings in the Middle Sea" (PDF) .

Papers and Monographs from the Norwegian Institute at Athens .

14 : 11.

^ Seirinidou, Vaso (2017).

"The Mediterranean" . In Mishkova, Diana; Trencsényi, Balázs (eds.).

European Regions and Boundaries: A Conceptual History . Berghahn Books. p. 80.

ISBN 978-1-78533-585-3 .

^ Fabricius, Adam (1882).

Forbindelserne mellem Norden og den spanske halvø i ældre tider (in Danish). G. E. C. Gad. p. 36.

Denne begivenhed fandt sted i året 230 (der begyndte den 18de septbr. 844), og Andalus blev befriet fra deres ødelæggelser. Abdurrahman besøgte selv de steder, hvor de vare trængte ind, oprettede skaden, de havde gjort, og ved at forstærke besætningerne sikrede han egnen mod fremtidige indfald af disse barbarer." English: This event took place in the year 230 (which began on 18 September 844), and Andalusia was freed from their ravages. Abdurrahman himself visited the places they had invaded, surveyed the damage they had caused, and, by reinforcing the garrisons, secured the region against future incursions by these barbarians.

^ a b c d García Losquiño, Irene (2019). Price, Neil; Eriksen, Marianne Hem; Jahnke, Carsten (eds.).

"Responses to Viking threat: Building defences, population displacement, and folklore development | Responses to the attack on Seville, AD 844" (PDF) .

Papers and Monographs from the Norwegian Institute at Athens .

14 : 67– 70.

^ Kennedy, Hugh (2014).

Muslim Spain and Portugal: A Political History of al-Andalus . Routledge. p. 58.

ISBN 978-1-317-87041-8 .

^ Gwyn Jones (2001).

A History of the Vikings . Oxford University Press. p.

214 .

ISBN 978-019280134-0 .

^ Dreyer (Firm) (November 1996).

"Norsk jul i bokform" .

The Norseman .

36 (6). Nordmanns-forbundet: 16 . Retrieved 5 January 2014 .

^ Stefan Brink; Neil Price (2008).

The Viking World . Routledge. p. 464.

ISBN 978-020341277-0 .

^ Lévi-Provençal, Evariste (1950).

Histoire de l'Espagne musulmane (in French). G. P. Maisonneuve. p. 224.

^ Muḥammad ibn ʻUmar Ibn al-Qūṭīyah (2009).

Early Islamic Spain: The History of Ibn Al-Qūṭīya : a Study of the Unique Arabic Manuscript in the Bibliothèque Nationale de France, Paris, with a Translation, Notes, and Comments . Taylor & Francis. p. 127.

ISBN 978-0415475525 .

^ Knutson, Sara Ann; Ellis, Caitlin (16 July 2021).

" 'Conversion' to Islam in Early Medieval Europe: Historical and Archaeological Perspectives on Arab and Northern Eurasian Interactions" .

Religions .

12 (7): 551.

doi : 10.3390/rel12070544 .

^ Lévi-Provençal, Évariste (1913–1936).

"Pampeluna" .

in Encyclopaedia of Islam First Edition .

doi : 10.1163/2214-871X_ei1_SIM_3594 .

^ Christys, Ann (2015).

Vikings in the South: Voyages to Iberia and the Mediterranean . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 171.

ISBN 978-1-4742-1377-6 .

^ Aguirre, Víctor Emanuel (2013).

"The Viking Expeditions to Spain During the 9th Century" (PDF) .

Mindre Skrifter .

30 (30). Centre for Medieval Studies, University of Southern Denmark: 11.

^ Nelson, Jinty (2001).

"Franks Divided, Vikings Ascendant" . In Sawyer, P.H. (ed.).

The Oxford Illustrated History of the Vikings . Oxford University Press. p. 29.

ISBN 978-0-19-285434-6 .

^ Riosalido, Jesús (1997).

"Los vikingos en al-Andalus" (PDF) .

Al-Andalus Magreb .

5 : 335– 344. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 July 2011 . Retrieved 11 April 2012 .

^ Fletcher, Richard A.

(1997) The conversion of Europe: from paganism to Christianity 371–1386 AD . HarperCollins.

ISBN 0-00-255203-5 . p. 370 ^ Ferguson, Robert (2009).

The Vikings: A History . Penguin. p. 218.

ISBN 978-1-101-15142-6 .

^ Vallvé Bermejo, Joaquín; García Gómez, Emilio (1989).

Nuevas ideas sobre la conquista árabe de España: toponimia y onomástica : discurso leído en el acto de su recepción pública . Real Academia de la Historia. p. 188. GGKEY:WJYGZ815TEG.

^ Eduardo Morales Romero (2004).

Historia de los vikingos en España: ataques e incursiones contra los reinos cristianos y musulmanes de la Península Ibérica en los siglos IX–XI . Miraguano Ediciones. p. 130.

ISBN 978-84-7813-270-6 .

^ Jean-Pierre Leguay; António Henrique R. de Oliveira Marques; Maria Ângela V. da Rocha Beirante (1993).

Portugal das invasões germânicas à "reconquista" . Editorial Presença. p. 125.

ISBN 9789722317191 .

^ Salma Khadra Jayyusi; Manuela Marín (1992).

The Legacy of Muslim Spain . Brill. p. 10.

ISBN 90-04-09599-3 .

^ Fadlan, Ibn (2012).

Ibn Fadlan and the Land of Darkness: Arab Travellers in the Far North . Translated by Lunde, Paul; Stone, Caroline. Penguin UK. p. 100.

ISBN 978-0-14-197504-7 .

^ See also History of Greenland#Norse failure .

^ UNESCO World Heritage Centre.

"L'Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site" Archived 16 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine .

unesco.org .

^ Tignor, Robert; Adelman, Jeremy; Brown, Peter; Elman, Benjamin; Kotkin, Stephen; Prakash, Gyan; Shaw, Brent; Aron, Stephen; Liu, Xinru; Marchand, Suzanne; Pittman, Holly; Tsin, Michael. Worlds Together, Worlds Apart: A History of the World: Beginnings Through the Fifteenth Century (4th ed.) (Vol. 1) (p. 352). W.W. Norton & Company. Kindle Edition.

^ Foote, P. and Wilson, D.M. (1970) The Viking Achievement . Sidgwick & Jackson Ltd.

ISBN 0-283-35499-2 . pp. 282–285.

^ Kerkhof, Maup van de (23 June 2023).

"Viking Weapons: From Farm Tools to War Weaponry | History Cooperative" . Retrieved 10 November 2023 .

^ "Viking homes" .

National Museum of Denmark . Retrieved 10 November 2023 .

^ "AFP: Viking 'sunstone' more than a myth" . 1 November 2011. Archived from the original on 20 June 2013 . Retrieved 15 April 2013 .

^ Horvàth, G. et al. (2011). 'On the trail of Vikings with polarized skylight: experimental study of the atmospheric optical prerequisites allowing polarimetric navigation by Viking seafarers' Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2011) 366, 772–782 doi : 10.1098/rstb.2010.0194 ^ Did the Vikings make a telescope?

Archived 25 April 2006 at the Wayback Machine BBC. 5 April 2000 ^ "Aesir | Norse gods, Asgard, Odin | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 10 November 2023 .

^ Birnbaum, Henrik (2023).

"Medieval Novgorod" . In Birnbaum, Henrik; Eekman, Thomas; McLean, Hugh; Riasanovsky, Nicholas V. (eds.).

California Slavic Studies, Vol. XIV . Univ of California Press. p. 7.

ISBN 978-0-520-34307-8 .

^ Price, Theron Douglas (2015).

Ancient Scandinavia: An Archaeological History from the First Humans to the Vikings . Oxford University Press. p. 336.

ISBN 978-0-19-023197-2 .

^ Katona, Csete (2022).

Vikings of the Steppe: Scandinavians, Rus', and the Turkic World (c. 750–1050) . Taylor & Francis. p. 79.

ISBN 978-1-000-68517-6 .

^ Mägi, Marika (2018).

In Austrvegr: The Role of the Eastern Baltic in Viking Age Communication across the Baltic Sea . Brill. pp.

97– 100.

ISBN 978-90-04-36381-6 .

^ Korpela, Jukka Jari (2018).

Slaves from the North: Finns and Karelians in the East European Slave Trade, 900–1600 . Brill. pp.

241– 242.

ISBN 978-90-04-38173-5 .

^ Duczko, Wladyslaw (2004).

Viking Rus: Studies on the Presence of Scandinavians in Eastern Europe . Brill. p. 215.

ISBN 978-90-04-13874-2 .

^ Blöndal, Sigfús (2007).

The Varangians of Byzantium . Cambridge University Press. pp.

7– 8.

ISBN 978-0-521-03552-1 .

^ Herring, Susan C.; Reenen, Pieter van; Schøsler, Lene (2001).

"On Textual Parameters and Older Languages" . In Herring, Susan C.; Reenen, Pieter van; Schøsler, Lene (eds.).

Textual Parameters in Older Languages . John Benjamins Publishing. p. 22.

ISBN 978-90-272-9960-4 .

^ a b Dommasnes, Liv Helga (1998).

"Women, Kinship, and the Basis of Power in the Norwegian Viking Age" . In Hays-Gilpin, Kelley; Whitley, David S. (eds.).

Reader in Gender Archaeology . Routledge. pp.

337– 338.

ISBN 978-0-415-17359-9 .

^ Jesch, Judith (1991).

Women in the Viking Age . Boydell & Brewer Ltd. pp.

3– 4.

ISBN 978-0-85115-360-5 .

^ Jesch, Judith (1991).

Women in the Viking Age . Boydell & Brewer Ltd. p. 42.

ISBN 978-0-85115-360-5 .

^ Sawyer, Birgit (2000).

The Viking-age Rune-stones: Custom and Commemoration in Early Medieval Scandinavia . Oxford University Press. pp.

1– 3.

ISBN 978-0-19-820643-9 .

^ Sawyer, Birgit (2000).

The Viking-age Rune-stones: Custom and Commemoration in Early Medieval Scandinavia . Oxford University Press. p. 20.

ISBN 978-0-19-820643-9 .

^ Sanders, Ruth H. (2021).

The Languages of Scandinavia: Seven Sisters of the North . University of Chicago Press. pp.

63– 64.

ISBN 978-0-226-75975-3 .

^ Barnes, Michael (2008).

"Language" . In McTurk, Rory (ed.).

A Companion to Old Norse-Icelandic Literature and Culture . John Wiley & Sons. pp.

173– 174.

ISBN 978-1-4051-3738-6 .

^ Sullivan, Eric (2020).

Marine Encyclopaedic Dictionary . Taylor & Francis. p. 498.

ISBN 978-1-000-28815-5 .

^ Arter, David (1999).

Scandinavian Politics Today . Manchester University Press. p. 9.

ISBN 978-0-7190-5133-3 .

^ a b c d e f Crystal, David, The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language , CUP, 2001 edition, ISBN 0-521-59655-6 , pp. 25–26.

^ "The -by ending is almost entirely confined to the area of the Danelaw, supporting a theory of Scandinavian origin, despite the existence of the word by "dwelling" in Old English." Crystal, p. 25.

^ a b Margaryan, Ashot; et al. (17 July 2019). "Population genomics of the Viking world".

bioRxiv 10.1101/703405 .

Preprint via ResearchGate Archived 2 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine • Margaryan, Ashot; et al. (September 2020).

"Population genomics of the Viking world" .

Nature .

585 (7825): 390– 396.

Bibcode : 2020Natur.585..390M .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-020-2688-8 .

hdl : 10852/83989 .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

PMID 32939067 .

S2CID 221769227 .

Archived from the original on 4 October 2023 . Retrieved 25 July 2021 .

^ "Sample from Homo sapiens – BioSample – NCBI" .

www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov .

Archived from the original on 9 April 2022 . Retrieved 22 January 2021 .

^ Duczko, Wladyslaw (2004).

Viking Rus: Studies on the Presence of Scandinavians in Eastern Europe . Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-13874-2 .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2023 . Retrieved 28 January 2021 .

^ "World's largest DNA sequencing of Viking skeletons reveals they weren't all Scandinavian" .

phys.org .

Archived from the original on 3 October 2020 . Retrieved 9 October 2020 .

^ Oxford Dictionary of British Place Names Cited sources [ edit ] Forte, Angelo; Oram, Richard; Pedersen, Frederik (2005).

Viking Empires . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-82992-2 .

Frucht, R. (2004), Eastern Europe: an introduction to the people, lands, and culture.

, Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO Hall, Richard (2010).

Viking Age Archaeology . Shire Publications.

ISBN 978-0-7478-0063-7 .

Kempke, Torsten (2001). "Skandinavisch-slawische Kontakte an der südlichen Ostseeküste". In Harck, Ole; Lübke, Christian (eds.).

Zwischen Reric und Bornhöved: die Beziehungen zwischen den Dänen und ihren slawischen Nachbarn vom 9. bis ins 13. Jahrhundert : Beiträge einer internationalen Konferenz, Leipzig, 4.–6. Dezember 1997 (in German). Franz Steiner Verlag.

ISBN 978-3-515-07671-5 .

Jansson, Sven B. F. (1980).

Runstenar . Stockholm: Svenska turistföreningen.

ISBN 91-7156-015-7 .

OCLC 7837892 .

Jones, Gwyn (1968).

A History of the Vikings . Oxford University Press.

OCLC 581030305 .

Mägi, Marika (2015). "Chapter 4. Bound for the Eastern Baltic: Trade and Centres AD 800–1200". In Barrett, James H.; Gibbon, Sarah Jane (eds.).

Maritime Societies of the Viking and Medieval World . Maney Publishing. pp.

41– 46.

ISBN 978-1-909662-79-7 .

Martens, Irmelin (2004), "Indigenous and imported Viking Age weapons in Norway – a problem with European implications" (PDF) , Journal of Nordic Archaeological Science , 14 : 125– 137 , retrieved 8 October 2018 Pritsak, Omeljan (1981).

The origin of Rus' . Cambridge, Mass.: Distributed by Harvard University Press for the Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute.

ISBN 0-674-64465-4 .

OCLC 8424246 .

Tvauri, Andres (2012).

The migration period, pre-viking age, and viking age in Estonia . Tartu University Press.

ISBN 9789949199365 . Archived from the original on 27 March 2022 . Retrieved 2 January 2021 .

Further reading [ edit ] Background [ edit ] Graham-Campbell, J. (2001), The Viking World , London.

ISBN 978-0-7112-3468-0 General surveys [ edit ] Ahola, Joonas & Frog with Clive Tolley (eds.) (2014).

Fibula, Fabula, Fact – The Viking Age in Finland . Studia Fennica Historica 18. Helsinki: Finnish Literature Society.

Anker, P. (1970).

The Art of Scandinavia , Volume I, London and New York ISBN 9780600100065 Fuglesang, S.H. (1996). "Viking Art", in Turner, J. (ed.), The Grove Dictionary of Art , Volume 32, London and New York, pp. 514–527, 531–532.

Graham-Campbell, J. (1980).

Viking Artefacts: A Select Catalogue , British Museum Publications: London.

ISBN 978-0-7141-1354-8 Graham-Campbell, James (2013).

Viking Art , Thames & Hudson.

ISBN 978-0-500-20419-1 Roesdahl, E. and Wilson, D.M. (eds) (1992).

From Viking to Crusader: Scandinavia and Europe 800–1200 , Copenhagen and New York. [exhibition catalogue].

ISBN 978-0-8478-1625-5 Williams, G., Pentz, P. and Wemhoff, M. (eds), Vikings: Life and Legend , British Museum Press: London, 2014. [exhibition catalogue].

ISBN 978-0-7141-2336-3 Wilson, D.M. & Klindt-Jensen, O. (1980).

Viking Art , 2nd ed., George Allen and Unwin, 1980.

ISBN 978-0-04-709018-9 Carey, Brian Todd. "Technical marvels, Viking longships sailed seas and rivers, or served as floating battlefields", Military History 19, no. 6 (2003): 70–72.

Downham, Clare.

Viking Kings of Britain and Ireland: The Dynasty of Ívarr to A.D. 1014 . Edinburgh: Dunedin Academic Press, 2007 Hudson, Benjamin .

Viking Pirates and Christian Princes: Dynasty, Religion, and Empire in the North Atlantic . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005 ISBN 0-19-516237-4 .

Logan, F. Donald The Vikings in History (London: Hutchison & Co. 1983) ISBN 0-415-08396-6 .

Maier, Bernhard .

The Celts: A history from earliest times to the present . Notre Dame, Indiana: University of Notre Dame Press, 2003.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Viking Age .

Oceans portal Vikings – BBC History (collection of short articles under the headings Overview, Raiders and Settlers, Viking Culture, Evidence) Vikings: The North Atlantic Saga Archived 14 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine – Smithsonian website for travelling exhibition, 2000–2003 The Danish Viking Age Old Norse literature from «Kulturformidlingen norrøne tekster og kvad» Norway ScienceNordic's article on "How Vikings navigated the world" v t e Timeline of the history of Scandinavia v t e Norway articles History Stone Age Bronze Age Petty kingdoms Viking Age Unification High Middle Ages Kingdom of Norway (872–1397) Hereditary Kingdom of Norway Kalmar Union Denmark–Norway Kingdom of Norway (1814) Sweden–Norway End of the union World War II Reichskommissariat Quisling regime Norwegian government-in-exile 1945–2000 21st century Geography Climate Districts Extreme points Islands Lakes Mammals Mountains Municipalities Cities Protected areas Rivers World Heritage Sites Politics Administrative divisions National budget Constitution Correctional Service Courts Elections Foreign relations Governments Incarceration LGBT rights Military Monarchy Parliament Police Political parties Prime Minister Membership of International organizations Economy Energy Fisheries Government Pension Fund Industry Mining Natural gas Krone (currency) National bank Nordic model Norwegian paradox Oil Renewable energy Stock Exchange Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transport Rail Whaling Society Climate change Crime Demographics Education Ethnic groups Health Immigration Incarceration Irreligion Languages language conflict Norwegians Pensions Poverty Religion Women Culture Architecture Art Bunad (clothing) Christmas (season) Cinema Cuisine Jante law Music Norwegian language Literature Media Prostitution Public holidays Sport Nationalism Romantic nationalism Symbols Anthem Coat of arms Flags national flag Mottos Name of Norway Outline Category Portal v t e Vikings Culture Blót Brisingamen Danegeld Dís Eddas Einherjar Futhark Elder Futhark Younger Futhark Germanic deities Gothi Hnefatafl Holmgang Leysingi Mjölnir Norsemen Norse funeral ( ship burial ) Norse mythology Norse rituals Old Norse Old Norse religion Raven banner Sagas Skald Seeress Skíðblaðnir Thrall Tyrfing Valhalla Valkyrie Viking Age Viking art Viking runestones Viking Age trade Wergeld Yggdrasil Ships and navigation Knarr Longship Viking ships Viking ship replica Visby lenses Homelands and colonies North Sea Empire Iceland Greenland Orkney Islands Shetland Faroe Islands North America L'Anse aux Meadows Vinland Jomsborg Kievan Rus' Expansion British Isles Danelaw Anglia Mercia York Isle of Man Scotland Wessex France Brittany Normandy Rhineland Pomerania Estonia Iberia Dublin Italy Battles Raid warfare and tactics Battle of Aclea First Battle of Alton Battle of Anglesey Sound Battle of Ashdown Battle of Assandun Battle of Basing Battle of Barry Battle of Bauds Battle of Benfleet Battle of Brávellir Battle of Brentford (1016) Battle of Brissarthe Battle of Brunanburh Battle of Buttington Battle of Cathair Cuan Battle of Chippenham Battle of Clontarf Battle of Confey Battle of Corbridge Battle of Cynwit Battle of Derby Battle of Dollar Battle of Edington Battle of Englefield Battle of Epiphany Battle of Fitjar Battle of Florvåg Battle of Fulford Battle of Fýrisvellir Battle of Glenmama Battle of Hafrsfjord Battle of Helgeå Battle of Hingston Down Battle of the Holme Battle of Hjörungavágr Battle of Islandbridge Battle of Largs Battle of Leuven (891) Battle of London Bridge Battle of Lüneburg Heath Battle of Lyrskov Heath Battle of Mag Femen Battle of Maldon Battle of Meretun Battle of Nesjar Battle of Niså Battle of Norditi Battle of Pinhoe Battle of Rastarkalv Battle of Reading (871) Battle of Renfrew Battle of Remich Battle of Ringmere Battle of Rochester Battle of Sasireti Battle of Saucourt-en-Vimeu Battle of Skyhill Battle of Stainmore Battle of Stamford (894) Battle of Stamford (918) Battle of Stamford Bridge Battle of Stiklestad Battle of Strangford Lough Battle of Svolder Battle of Sulcoit Battle of Tara (Ireland) Battle of Tarbat Ness Battle of Tempsford Battle of Tettenhall Battle of Thetford Battle of Thimeon Battle of Trans-la-Forêt Battle of York Burning of Luimneach Viking raid on Galicia and Asturias Raids in the Rhineland Raid on Seville Sack of Santiago de Compostela Siege of Asselt Siege of Chartres (911) Siege of Constantinople (860) Sack of Paris Siege of Paris Cnut the Great's invasion of England Arms, armour and fortifications Berserker Danevirke Great Heathen Army Hersir Hird Holmgang Viking Age arms and armour Halberd Atgeir Skeggöx Dane axe Gjermundbu helmet Yarm helmet Sword Ulfberht Ingelrii Ring Fortress Raid Warfare and Tactics Shield-maiden Svinfylking Formation Varangian Guard Historical figures Airdeconut Amlaíb Cenncairech Amlaíb Cuarán Amlaíb Conung Aud the Deep-Minded (Ketilsdóttir) Auisle Bagsecg Berle-Kari Birka female Viking warrior Bjørn (floruit 856–58) Bjorn Asbrandsson Bjarni Herjólfsson Björn Ironside Bjorn the Easterner Cnut Egill Skallagrímsson Eohric of East Anglia Eric Bloodaxe Erik the Red Eric I of Denmark Eiríkr Hákonarson Freydís Eiríksdóttir Freygeirr Garðar Svavarsson Godfrid Haraldsson Godfrid, Duke of Frisia Grímur Kamban Gudrid Thorbjarnardóttir Gunnar Hámundarson Guthred Guthrum Hakon Rognvaldsson Haakon the Good Haakon Sigurdsson Halfdan Long-Leg Halfdan Ragnarsson Hagrold Harald Bluetooth Harald Fairhair Harald Hardrada Harald Wartooth Hastein Hemming Halfdansson Hervor Hrafna-Flóki Vilgerðarson Hvitserk Ingvar the Far-Travelled Ingólfr Arnarson Ivar the Boneless Jomsvikings Ketilsdóttir Ketill Flatnose Ketil Trout (Iceland) Lagertha Leif Erikson Magnus Barefoot Naddodd Náttfari Olaf Tryggvason Olav Haraldsson Olaf the White Olof Skötkonung Orm Storolfsson Ohthere of Hålogaland Ottir Palnatoke Ragnar Lodbrok Ragnar Ragnarsson Ragnhild Eriksdotter Ragnall ua Imair Raud the Strong Reginheri Rognvald Eysteinsson Rollo Rorik Rusla Snæfrithr Svásadottir Sigvaldi Strut-Haraldsson Sigurd Ring Sigurd Snake-in-the-Eye Sigurd the Stout Sitric Caech Skalla-Grímr Snorri Sturluson Steinunn Refsdóttir Styrbjörn the Strong Sweyn Asleifsson Sweyn Forkbeard Þorbjörg Lítilvölva Thorfinn the Mighty Thorfinn Torf-Einarsson Thorkell the Tall Thorir Hund Thorolf Kveldulfsson Thorstein the Red Tryggvi the Pretender Turgesius Valtoke Gormsson Vagn Åkesson Veborg Ubba Uí Ímair Unn the Deep-Minded Runestones Ballstorp Runestone Baltic area runestones Danish Runic Inscription 66 Danish Runic Inscription 154 Danish Runic Inscription 380 Egtved Runestone England runestones Greece runestones Gunnar's bridge runestones Hagby Runestones Hakon Jarl runestones Hällestad Runestones Ingvar runestones Italy runestones Karlevi Runestone Lingsberg Runestones Norra Härene Runestone Orkesta Runestones Runestones at Aspa Runestones of Högby Sædinge Runestone Sigtrygg Runestones Simris Runestones Sjörup Runestone Småland Runic Inscription 48 Södermanland Runic Inscription 174 Södermanland Runic Inscription 333 Sparlösa Runestone Stangeland stone Stone of Eric Runestone U 582 Uppland Runic Inscription 158 Varangian runestones Västergötland Runic Inscription 40 Västra Nöbbelöv Runestone Viking runestones Related Viking revival Viking Ship Museum (Oslo) Viking Ship Museum (Roskilde) v t e Germanic peoples Ethnolinguistic group of Northern European origin primarily identified as speakers of Germanic languages History Nordic Bronze Age Germania Pre-Roman Iron Age Roman Iron Age Romano-Germanic culture Germanic Iron Age Viking Age Early culture Architecture Art Calendar Clothing Family Festivals Folklore Proto-Germanic folklore Anglo-Saxon mythology Continental Germanic mythology Norse mythology ) Funerary practices Anglo-Saxon Norse Law Anglo-Saxon Norse Literature Anglo-Saxon Norse Names Gothic Numbers Paganism Anglo-Saxon Gothic Norse Rings Scripts Gothic alphabet Runes Sippe Symbology Warfare Anglo-Saxon Gothic and Vandal Viking Languages Germanic parent language Proto-Germanic language East Germanic languages North Germanic languages West Germanic languages Groups Alemanni Brisgavi Bucinobantes Lentienses Raetovari Adrabaecampi Angles Anglo-Saxons Ambrones Ampsivarii Angrivarii Armalausi Auiones Avarpi Baemi Baiuvarii Banochaemae Bastarnae Batavi Belgae Germani cisrhenani Atuatuci Caeroesi Condrusi Eburones Paemani Segni Morini Nervii Bateinoi Betasii Brondings Bructeri Burgundians Buri Cananefates Caritni Casuari Chaedini Chaemae Chamavi Chali Charudes Chasuarii Chattuarii Chatti Chauci Cherusci Cimbri Cobandi Corconti Cugerni Danes Dauciones Dulgubnii Favonae Firaesi Fosi Franks Ripuarian Franks Salian Franks Frisiavones Frisii Gambrivii Geats Gepids Goths Crimean Goths Greuthungi Gutones Ostrogoths Thervingi Thracian Goths Visigoths Gutes Harii Hermunduri Heruli Hilleviones Ingaevones Irminones Istvaeones Jutes Juthungi Lacringi Lemovii Lombards Heaðobards Lugii Diduni Helisii Helveconae Manimi Nahanarvali Marcomanni Marsacii Marsi Mattiaci Nemetes Njars Nuithones Osi Quadi Reudigni Rugii Rugini Saxons Semnones Sicambri Sciri Sitones Suarines Suebi Sunici Swedes Taifals Tencteri Teutons Thelir Thuringii Toxandri Treveri Triboci Tubantes Tulingi Tungri Ubii Usipetes Vagoth Vandals Hasdingi Silingi Vangiones Varisci Victohali Vidivarii Vinoviloth Warini Christianization Gothic Christianity Christianization of the Franks Christianisation of Anglo-Saxon England Christianization of Scandinavia Christianization of Iceland Category v t e History of Europe Prehistory Paleolithic Europe Neolithic Europe Bronze Age Europe Iron Age Europe Classical antiquity Classical Greece Roman Republic Hellenistic period Roman Empire Early Christianity Christianity in late antiquity Crisis of the Third Century Fall of the Western Roman Empire Late antiquity Middle Ages Early Middle Ages Migration Period Christianity in the Middle Ages Christianization Francia Anglo-Saxon England Byzantine Empire Papal States Bulgarian Empire First Second Maritime republics Venice Genoa Pisa Amalfi Viking Age Kievan Rus' Crown of Aragon ( Aragon , Catalonia , Valencia , Majorca ) Holy Roman Empire High Middle Ages Republic of Florence Feudalism Crusades Mongol invasion Serbian Empire Late Middle Ages Black Death Hundred Years' War Kalmar Union Modern period Renaissance Early modern Christianity in the modern era Reformation Age of Discovery Baroque Grand Duchy of Tuscany Thirty Years' War Absolute monarchy Ottoman Empire Portuguese Empire Spanish Empire Early modern France Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Cossack Hetmanate Swedish Empire Dutch Republic British Empire Habsburg monarchy Russian Empire Age of Enlightenment Great Divergence Industrial Revolution French Revolution Napoleonic Wars Nationalism Revolutions of 1848 World War I Russian Revolution Interwar period World War II Cold War European integration Euro area crisis COVID-19 pandemic Russian invasion of Ukraine See also Art of Europe Bibliography of European history Genetic history of Europe History of Christianity History of the Mediterranean region History of the European Union History of Western civilization Maritime history of Europe Military history of Europe Crusading movement v t e European Middle Ages Early Middle Ages Migration Period Decline of the Western Roman Empire Barbarian kingdoms Late antiquity Decline of Hellenistic religion Christianity in the Middle Ages Christianization Rise of Islam Papal States First Bulgarian Empire Frankish Empire Principality of Serbia Duchy of Croatia Kingdom of Croatia Anglo-Saxon England Viking Age Carolingian Empire Old Church Slavonic Rise of the Venetian Republic Civitas Schinesghe Kievan Rus' Growth of the Eastern Roman Empire Reconquista High Middle Ages Norman Conquest Holy Roman Empire Second Bulgarian Empire Georgian Empire Kingdom of Poland Croatia in personal union with Hungary Kingdom of Serbia Feudalism Rise of the Republic of Genoa Great Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Republic of Florence Scholasticism Capet–Plantagenet feud Monasticism Communalism Manorialism Medieval Warm Period Mongol invasion of Europe Kingdom of Portugal Late Middle Ages Hundred Years' War Wars of the Roses Hussite Wars Burgundy Milan France England Serbian Empire Castile Western Schism Fall of Constantinople Rise of the Ottoman Empire Swiss mercenaries Chivalry Renaissance Humanism Universities Crisis of the late Middle Ages Great Famine Little Ice Age Culture Agriculture Architecture Art Church and State Cuisine Crusading movement Dance Demography Domes Hastilude Household Hunting In popular culture Itinerant court Literature Medicine Minstrel Music Instruments Philosophy Poetry Science Slavery Technology Theatre Warfare Women Related Medieval anthropology Dark Ages Disability in the Middle Ages Basic topics list Land terms Medievalism Medieval reenactment Medieval studies Misconceptions Neo-medievalism Peasant Wars Post-classical history Timeline Historiography in the Middle Ages Medieval archaeology Portal Category WikiProject NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐jf6jq
Cached time: 20250818112450
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.002 seconds
Real time usage: 2.436 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14453/1000000
Revision size: 157003/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 468583/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 19294/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 61/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 640573/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.178/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22769982/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1954.212      1 -total
 45.68%  892.647      1 Template:Reflist
 32.04%  626.123     90 Template:Cite_book
  6.48%  126.569     28 Template:Sfn
  4.76%   92.944      1 Template:Scandinavia
  4.46%   87.143      4 Template:Lang
  4.45%   87.009      6 Template:Navbox
  3.63%   70.923     17 Template:Cite_web
  3.35%   65.500      1 Template:Norway_topics
  3.27%   63.928      1 Template:Country_topics Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:stable-pcache:32538:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818112450 and revision id 1305891971. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Viking_Age&oldid=1305891971 " Categories : Viking Age History of Scandinavia Iron Age cultures of Europe Archaeological cultures in Sweden Archaeological cultures in Denmark Archaeological cultures in Norway Archaeological cultures in Estonia Archaeological cultures in England Archaeological cultures in Scotland Archaeological cultures in Ireland Archaeological cultures in France Early Middle Ages Historical eras Vikings Hidden categories: Pages using the EasyTimeline extension CS1 errors: ISBN date Webarchive template wayback links Pages with missing ISBNs Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Pages using cite ODNB with id parameter CS1 Lithuanian-language sources (lt) CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv) CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Danish-language sources (da) CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Use dmy dates from June 2024 Use British English from September 2016 Articles needing additional references from August 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2015 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2020 Articles containing Icelandic-language text Articles containing Old Norse-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 18:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Viking Age 57 languages Add topic

