Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Peritrope Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Socratic argument Part of a series on Platonism Life Works Theory of forms Intelligible form Hyperuranion Theory of soul Nous Thumos Phren Epistemology Anamnesis Peritrope Dianoia Cardinal virtues Moral rationalism Political philosophy Mimesis Orthotes onomaton Euthyphro dilemma The Republic Allegory of the cave Analogy of the Sun Analogy of the divided line Form of the Good Noble lie Philosopher king Plato's number Ship of State Ring of Gyges Myth of Er Timaeus Atlantis Demiurge World soul Organicism Classical element Platonic solid Tertium quid Khôra Related articles Commentaries The Academy in Athens Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Neoplatonism and Christianity Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Pseudo-Platonica Related categories Plato Philosophy portal v t e Peritrope ( Greek : περιτροπή ) is Socrates ' argument against Protagoras ' view of subjective truth , as presented in Plato 's book known as Theaetetus (169–171e). This formed part of the former's eighth objection, the "table-turning" argument that maintained Protagoras' doctrine was self-refuting.

[ 1 ] Peritrope – as the basic objection – has also been used by Greek philosophical commentators as well as modern philosophers.

[ 2 ] Overview [ edit ] The term itself came from an ancient Greek word that means "a turning back on one" and likened to the image of a snake devouring its own tail.

[ 3 ] Socrates' peritrope described Protagoras' view as a theory that no longer requires criticism because it already devours itself.

[ 3 ] Sextus Empiricus is thought to have given the name in a comment on Protagoras' view in Against the Logicians [ 4 ] written around 200 CE.

[ 5 ] The name has been in continuous use ever since, as Socrates' argument provides the foundation for classical propositional logic and hence much of traditional western philosophy (or analytic philosophy ). For instance, Sextus noted that Protagoras' famous doctrine that man is the measure of all things is self-refuting because "one of the things that appears (is judged) to be the case is that not every appearance is true".

[ 6 ] This assumption was later refuted due to a mistake on the part of Sextus' interpretation that the Protagorean measure doctrine boiled down to a subjectivist thesis that whatever appearance whatsoever is true.

[ 7 ] Well-known attestations of peritrope also include Avicenna and Thomas Aquinas , and in modern times Roger Scruton , Myles Burnyeat , and many others. The word is occasionally used to describe argument forms similar in nature to that of Socrates' overturning of Protagoras. Modern philosophers overturning Protagoras' subjective truth include Edmund Husserl and John Anderson .

[ 8 ] For many centuries the peritrope was used primarily as a tool for refuting versions of skepticism [ 9 ] that propose that truth is unknowable , which can be challenged by responding with the peritrope — the question, Well, then, how do you know that to be true?

This kind of skepticism and similar views are considered to be "self-refuting." In other words, a philosopher has retained what he has disavowed in and by the disavowal itself. In general, versions of the peritrope can be used to challenge many kinds of assertion that universality is impossible.

In What Plato Said , Paul Shorey notes: "The first argument advanced by Socrates is the so-called peritrope , to use the later technical term, that the opinion of Protagoras destroys itself, for, if truth is what each man troweth, and the majority of mankind in fact repudiates Protagoras' definition of truth, it is on Protagoras' own pragmatic showing more often false than true".

In Modern Philosophy: An Introduction and Survey (1996), Roger Scruton formulates the argument as such: "A writer who says that there are no truths, or that all truth is 'merely subjective,' is asking you not to believe him. So don't." See also [ edit ] Self-refuting idea References [ edit ] ^ Chappell, Timothy (2005).

Reading Plato's Theaetetus . Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, Inc. p. 108.

ISBN 3896653156 .

^ Mendelson, Michael (2002).

Many Sides: A Protagorean Approach to the Theory, Practice and Pedagogy of Argument . Dordrecht: Springer Science & Business Media. p. 19.

ISBN 1402004028 .

^ a b Snare, Francis (2002).

The Nature of Moral Thinking . New York: Routledge. pp.

101– 102.

ISBN 0203003055 .

^ (389-90).

^ Tindale, Christopher W. (2012-09-18).

Reason's Dark Champions: Constructive Strategies of Sophistical Argument . Univ of South Carolina Press.

ISBN 9781611172331 .

^ Burnyeat, M.F. (2012).

Explorations in Ancient and Modern Philosophy, Volume 1 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 27.

ISBN 9780521750721 .

^ Carter, J. (2016).

Metaepistemology and Relativism . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 37.

ISBN 9781349673759 .

^ Burnyeat, M. F. (2012).

Explorations in Ancient and Modern Philosophy . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. p. 27.

ISBN 9780521750721 .

^ Fogelin, Robert (1999).

Wittgenstein-Arg Philosophers . Oxon: Routledge. p. 229.

ISBN 9780415203784 .

External links [ edit ] Myles, Fredric Burnyeat (1976). "Protagoras and Self-Refutation in Plato's Theaetetus".

The Philosophical Review .

85 (2): 172– 195.

doi : 10.2307/2183729 .

JSTOR 2183729 .

Chappell, Timothy (2006).

"Reading the Peritrope" ( .doc ) . Phronesis.

v t e Socrates Bibliography Cultural depictions Life Trial of Socrates Socratic problem Concepts Social gadfly Socratic dialogue Socratic intellectualism Socratic method Socratic paradox Socratic questioning Phrases " I know that I know nothing " " The unexamined life is not worth living " Family Sophroniscus (father) Phaenarete (mother) Xanthippe (wife) Lamprocles (son) Menexenus (son) Myrto (wife) Works that include Socrates Art Double Herm of Socrates and Seneca (3rd-century sculpture) The Death of Socrates (1787 painting) Socrates (1950 sculpture) Stage The Clouds (423 BC play) Der geduldige Socrates (1721 opera) Socrates (1759 play) Socrate (1919 oratorio) Socrates on Trial (2007 play) Literature De genio Socratis (1st-century essay) On the Concept of Irony with Continual Reference to Socrates (1841 thesis) The Plot to Save Socrates (2006 novel) Other Serenade after Plato's "Symposium" (1954 serenade) Barefoot in Athens (1966 film) Socrates (1970 film) Dialogues Plato Apology Axiochus Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Demodocus Epinomis Eryxias Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hipparchus Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Lysis Menexenus Meno Minos On Justice On Virtue Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Theages Timaeus Xenophon Apology Memorabilia Oeconomicus Symposium Other Halcyon Socratic Letters Related Euthyphro dilemma Form of the Good Peritrope Religious skepticism Category v t e Plato Works Apology Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Laws Lysis Menexenus Meno Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Timaeus Of doubtful authenticity Axiochus Definitions Demodocus Epigrams Epinomis Epistles Seventh Letter Eryxias Halcyon Hipparchus Minos On Justice On Virtue Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Theages Life The Academy in Athens Socratic problem List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Legacy Unwritten doctrines List of manuscripts of Plato's dialogues 23 24 228 229 Commentaries Middle Platonism Neoplatonism and Christianity and Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Plato's Dream Poitier Meets Plato Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peritrope&oldid=1292278322 " Categories : Platonism Philosophical arguments Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 04:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peritrope Add languages Add topic

