Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Catholic Church 2 United States politics Toggle United States politics subsection 2.1 Abortion 2.2 Other issues 3 Culture of death Toggle Culture of death subsection 3.1 Wider usage 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Culture of life 4 languages Español Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Way of life highlighting life's sanctity; opposes abortion and assisted suicide This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article uses texts from within a religion or faith system without referring to secondary sources that critically analyse them.

Please help improve this article .

( September 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Culture of life" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's lead section may need to be rewritten . The reason given is: wp:opinion wp:synth wp:WEIGHT .

Please review the lead guide and help improve the lead of this article if you can.

( December 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series of articles on Abortion and the Catholic Church Official opposition Canon 915 Eucharist denial or excommunication Canon 1397 §2 Evangelium vitae Humanae vitae In politics Philosophy and theology Consistent life ethic Culture of life Sanctity of life Ensoulment Double effect Indirect abortion History Gianna Beretta Molla Margaret McBride excommunication 2009 Brazilian girl abortion case Death of Savita Halappanavar Activism March for Life Life and Family Paris Prague Washington, D.C.

West Coast Priests for Life Sisters of Life Knights of Columbus Catholic Answers CatholicVote.org American Life League Center for Family and Human Rights National Right to Life Committee Dissidence Catholics for Choice A Catholic Statement on Pluralism and Abortion See also Other Christian views In the United States Abortion Abortion law Catholic Church portal v t e A culture of life describes a way of life based on the belief that human life begins at conception, and is sacred at all stages from conception through natural death .

[ 1 ] It opposes abortion , euthanasia , capital punishment (also known as the death penalty), [ note 1 ] studies and medicines involving embryonic stem cells , and contraception , because they are seen as destroying life.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] It also promotes policies that "lift up the human spirit with compassion and love." [ 8 ] The term originated in moral theology , especially that of the Catholic Church , and was popularly championed by Pope John Paul II ; [ 9 ] [ 10 ] it has been widely used by religious leaders in evangelical Christianity as well.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The philosophy of such a culture is a consistent life ethic .

[ 13 ] In the United States, secular politicians such as George W. Bush and Kanye West have also used the phrase.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 8 ] In 2004, the Republican Party included a plank in their platform for "Promoting a Culture of Life".

[ 16 ] Catholic Church [ edit ] Issues included in a Culture of Life Promotion of Opposition to Agape love and charity [ 17 ] [ 18 ] Abortion [ 5 ] Unjust wars [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Capital punishment [ 21 ] [ 22 ] Murder and suicide [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] Motherhood , fatherhood , Matrimony , chastity , fidelity Virtue [ 26 ] Contraception [ 7 ] [ 5 ] Human sterilization [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 5 ] Organ donation [ 31 ] [ 26 ] Euthanasia [ 6 ] [ 25 ] Human cloning [ 32 ] [ 33 ] Adult stem cell research [ 34 ] [ 33 ] Embryonic stem cell and fetal research The expression "culture of life" entered popular parlance from Pope John Paul II in the 1990s.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] He used the term in his 1991 encyclical Centesimus annus , [ 35 ] and then more fully expanded upon it in the 1995 encyclical Evangelium vitae ("Gospel of Life"): In our present social context, marked by a dramatic struggle between the "culture of life" and the "culture of death", there is need to develop a deep critical sense, capable of discerning true values and authentic needs.

[ 36 ] In the encyclical, the pope noted that even those who were not Catholic "can appreciate the intrinsic value of human life." [ 37 ] He also issued "a pressing appeal addressed to each and every person, in the name of God: Respect, protect, love, and serve life, every human life! Only in this direction will you find justice, development, true freedom, peace and happiness!" [ 37 ] [ 38 ] John Paul linked this to Catholic teaching, which believes every person is created in the image and likeness of God and is intimately loved by God.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] The Church, then, must build a culture of life that values each person as a person, not for what they own, do, or produce.

[ 41 ] [ 40 ] It must also protect every human life, especially those that are threatened or weak.

[ 42 ] [ 40 ] The doctrine had foundations in earlier church teaching such as Pope Paul VI 's 1968 encyclical Humanae vitae , [ 43 ] which articulated the Church's position defending life from conception to natural death, disapproving medical procedures harming an unborn fetus, which the Church holds to be a person with an inviolable right to life . Catholic hospitals and medical institutions will not perform such procedures.

[ citation needed ] Following the promulgation of Evangelium vitae , advocates of a culture of life founded the Culture of Life Foundation in the United States to promote the concepts behind the Pope's encyclical.

[ 44 ] Pope John Paul II recognized and blessed the foundation in 1997.

[ 45 ] [ 44 ] United States politics [ edit ] George W. Bush signing the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act of 2003, surrounded by members of Congress This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Evangelium vitae has been described as the Catholic academic Christopher Kaczor as the " magna carta for the pro-life movement ." [ 37 ] Evangelicals and others have also adopted the phrase.

[ 46 ] Abortion [ edit ] On October 3, during the 2000 U.S. presidential election campaign, then-Texas Governor George W. Bush , a Methodist, cited the term during a televised debate against then Vice President Al Gore .  Bush expressed concerns that Mifepristone , then newly approved as an abortifacient pill, would encourage more women to terminate their pregnancies; whereas his goal was to make such terminations rarer: Surely this nation can come together to promote the value of life. Surely we can fight off these laws that will encourage doctors or allow doctors to take the lives of our seniors. Sure, we can work together to create a culture of life so some of these youngsters who feel like they can take a neighbor's life with a gun will understand that that's not the way America is meant to be.

[ 47 ] Leonard Mary of The Boston Globe said that Bush had directly borrowed his language from John Paul II, viewing this as a deliberate strategic attempt to gain political support from "moderate" Catholics voters (while not coming out so strongly against abortion rights that it would alienate pro-choice voters).

[ 37 ] [ 8 ] Some voters believed that only the Republican Party would build a culture of life in the United States, and this helped Bush win.

[ 48 ] Some Catholics, [ who?

] criticized Bush for apparent inconsistency between his support of a culture of life and his strong support for the death penalty, which Catholic doctrine permits where there is no other means for society to protect itself. As Governor of Texas , Bush repeatedly authorized executions of convicted murderers.

Kristen Day, the executive director of Democrats for Life of America , says that "achieving a culture of life cannot be done by simply voting Republican."  Day says that "to be truly pro-life, we must support a broad spectrum of issues including worker's compensation, minimum wage, and education assistance for displaced workers", [ 49 ] as well as addressing poverty, including a livable wage and health care.

[ 50 ] Day says that Republicans should broaden their definition of a culture of life beyond simple opposition to abortion, and that to achieve a true culture of life that members of both parties will be needed.

[ 51 ] The 2004 Republican National Convention adopted a platform with a plank titled "Promoting a Culture of Life." [ 52 ] [ 16 ] The platform's anti-abortion stance included positions on abortion; access to healthcare despite disability, age, or infirmity; euthanasia; assisted suicide; and promoted research and resources to alleviate the pain of the terminally ill.

[ 16 ] Other issues [ edit ] The phrase "culture of life" was also invoked during the Terri Schiavo case of March 2005 when the phrase was used in support of legislative and legal efforts to prolong the life of a woman in a persistent vegetative state .

[ 53 ] [ 46 ] It has also been used to promote providing inexpensive medical care for people in impoverished countries.

[ 54 ] Following the Boston Marathon bombing , the Catholic bishops of Massachusetts opposed the death penalty for terrorist bomber Dzhokhar Tsarnaev , citing the need to build a culture of life.

[ 55 ] In their statement, they cited a 2005 document by the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops , A Culture of Life and the Penalty of Death, which said "no matter how heinous the crime, if society can protect itself without ending a human life, it should do so." [ 55 ] A growing culture of life in the United States, one that took the protection of life more seriously, led to the rapid adoption of infant safe-haven laws in the early 2000s.

[ 56 ] Under these laws, mothers can leave their newborn children in places such as hospitals, police stations and fire stations, without being criminally charged with child abandonment.

Culture of death [ edit ] Pope John Paul II also used the opposing term "culture of death" in Evangelium vitae (April 1995): In fact, while the climate of widespread moral uncertainty can in some way be explained by the multiplicity and gravity of today's social problems, and these can sometimes mitigate the subjective responsibility of individuals, it is no less true that we are confronted by an even larger reality, which can be described as a veritable structure of sin. This reality is characterized by the emergence of a culture which denies solidarity and in many cases takes the form of a veritable "culture of death". This culture is actively fostered by powerful cultural, economic and political currents which encourage an idea of society excessively concerned with efficiency.

[ 57 ] He argued that there was "a war of the powerful against the weak: a life which would require greater acceptance, love and care is considered useless, or held to be an intolerable burden, and is therefore rejected in one way or another." [ 57 ] Those who are ill, handicapped, or just simply threaten the well being or lifestyle of the more powerful thus become enemies to be eliminated.

[ 57 ] John Paul said he saw this as applying both between individuals and between peoples and states.

[ 57 ] He added his belief that every time an "innocent life" is taken (dating back to the time of Cain and Abel ) that it was "a violation of the ‘spiritual’ kinship uniting mankind in one great family, in which all share the same fundamental good: equal personal dignity." [ 37 ] [ 58 ] Any threat to the human person, including wars, class conflict, civil unrest, ecological recklessness, and sexual irresponsibility, should therefore be regarded in his opinion as part of the "culture of death." [ 37 ] Without morals, Cardinal Cormac Murphy-O'Connor said, "it is the strong who decide the fate of the weak," and "human beings therefore become instruments of other human beings... We are already on that road: for what else is the termination of millions of lives in the womb since the Abortion Act was introduced, and embryo selection on the basis of gender and genes?" [ 59 ] Wider usage [ edit ] Advocates of a culture of life argue that a culture of death results in political, economic, or eugenic murder. They point to historical events like the USSR 's Great Purges , the Nazi Holocaust , China's Great Leap Forward and Pol Pot 's Khmer Rouge as examples of devaluation of human life taken to an extreme conclusion. The term is used by those in the consistent life ethic movement to refer to supporters of embryonic stem cell research, legalized abortion, and euthanasia.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] Some in the anti-abortion movement, such as those from the Center for Bio-Ethical Reform , have compared those in the abortion-rights movement to the perpetrators of the Nazi Holocaust.

[ 66 ] They say that their opponents share the same disregard for human life.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] See also [ edit ] Catholicism portal Christianity portal Christian right Consistent life ethic Family values Sanctity of life Affirmation of life – Concept in Friedrich Nietzsche's philosophy Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Reverence for Life – Concept in Albert Schweitzer's ethical philosophy Notes [ edit ] ^ In 1969, Paul VI removed the death penalty from Vatican Fundamental Law . In 1995, Pope John Paul II issued his Evangelium vitae doctrine, where he urged members of the Catholic Church to oppose executions unless they were necessary to defend others. In 2011, Pope Benedict XVI launched efforts to eliminate capital punishment completely. In 2018, Pope Francis declared capital punishment inadmissible, ending any church support for executions.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ Evangelium vitae .

^ "The Church's Anti-Death Penalty Position | USCCB" . Archived from the original on October 16, 2011.

^ "Op-Ed: The Catholic Church's opposition to the death penalty began with previous popes" .

Los Angeles Times . August 8, 2018.

^ "Pope Francis declares death penalty inadmissible in all cases" .

BBC News . August 2, 2018.

^ a b c d Evangelium vitae , p. 16.

^ a b Catechism of the Catholic Church (2nd ed.).

Libreria Editrice Vaticana . 2019.

Paragraphs 2276–2279 .

^ a b Humanae vitae , pp. 15–18.

^ a b c Leonard, Mary (October 9, 2000). "Bush woos Catholics on abortion".

The Boston Globe . p. 1.

^ a b Grondelski, John (June 30, 2018).

"Thoughts on a Culture of Life" . Retrieved October 1, 2018 .

^ a b Barry, Vincent (2011).

Bioethics in a Cultural Context . Cengage Learning. p. 192.

ISBN 9780495814085 .

^ George, Timothy; Guarino, Thomas G. (2015).

Evangelicals and Catholics Together at Twenty: Vital Statements on Contested Topics . Brazos Press.

ISBN 978-1-4934-0237-3 .

^ Goodstein, Laurie (March 24, 2005).

"Schiavo Case Highlights Catholic-Evangelical Alliance" .

The New York Times . Retrieved August 20, 2020 .

... is testament to growing alliance of conservative Roman Catholics and evangelicals who have found common cause in 'culture of life' agenda ...

^ Rozell, M.; Whitney, G. (2007).

Religion and the Bush Presidency . Springer. p. 206.

ISBN 978-0-230-60735-4 .

^ Kornhaber, Spencer (August 14, 2020).

"Kanye West, Political Pawn" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved August 20, 2020 .

^ David Masci (April 11, 2007).

"The Culture War and the Coming Election" .

Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life .

^ a b c "2004 Republican Party Platform: A Safer World and a More Hopeful America" (PDF) . The American Presidency Project. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 24, 2015 . Retrieved October 3, 2018 .

^ Kaczor, Christopher.

"Build the Culture of Life" .

Catholic Answers . Archived from the original on November 29, 2016 . Retrieved November 28, 2016 .

^ Tonti-Filippini, Nichols.

"The Culture of Life" . John Paul II Institute. Archived from the original on November 29, 2016 . Retrieved November 28, 2016 .

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church (2nd ed.).

Libreria Editrice Vaticana . 2019.

Paragraphs 2307–2317 .

^ Evangelium vitae , p. 27.

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church (2nd ed.).

Libreria Editrice Vaticana . 2019.

Paragraph 2267 .

^ Evangelium vitae , p. 56.

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church (2nd ed.).

Libreria Editrice Vaticana . 2019.

Paragraphs 2268–2269 .

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church (2nd ed.).

Libreria Editrice Vaticana . 2019.

Paragraphs 2280–2283 .

^ a b Evangelium vitae , p. 3.

^ a b Evangelium vitae , p. 86.

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church (2nd ed.).

Libreria Editrice Vaticana . 2019.

Paragraph 2399 .

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church (2nd ed.).

Libreria Editrice Vaticana . 2019.

Paragraph 2379 .

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church (2nd ed.).

Libreria Editrice Vaticana . 2019.

Paragraphs 2374–2375 .

^ Humanae vitae , p. 14.

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church (2nd ed.).

Libreria Editrice Vaticana . 2019.

Paragraph 2296 .

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church (2nd ed.).

Libreria Editrice Vaticana . 2019.

Paragraph 2378 .

^ a b "Culture of Life" . United States Conference of Catholic Bishops . Retrieved October 1, 2018 .

^ United States Conference of Catholic Bishops (2008).

United States Catechism for Adults . USCCB Publishing. pp.

392– 393.

ISBN 978-1-57455-450-2 .

^ John Paul II, Centesimus annus , paragraph 39, published 1 May 1991, accessed 13 May 2024 ^ John Paul II .

"Evangelium vitae" . Libreria Editrice Vaticana. Archived from the original on February 12, 2015.

^ a b c d e f Kaczor, Christopher (October 1, 2006).

"Build the Culture of Life" . Catholic Answers . Retrieved September 18, 2018 .

^ Evangelium vitae , p. 5.

^ Evangelium vitae , p. 2.

^ a b c "What is the Culture of Life?" . Archdiocese of Hobart . Retrieved September 18, 2018 .

^ Evangelium vitae , p. 23.

^ Evangelium vitae , p. 77.

^ "HUMANAE VITAE OF THE SUPREME PONTIFF" . Archived from the original on March 3, 2011.

^ a b "History" . Culture of Life Fondation . Retrieved September 18, 2018 .

^ Fox, Renée Claire; Swazey, Judith P. (2008).

Observing Bioethics . Oxford University Press. p. 319.

ISBN 9780195365559 .

^ a b Goodstein, Laurie (March 24, 2005).

"Schiavo Case Highlights Catholic-Evangelical Alliance" .

New York Times . Retrieved January 8, 2019 .

^ "Presidential Candidates Debates: "Presidential Debate in Boston" " .

The American Presidency Project . Archived from the original on November 28, 2016 . Retrieved November 28, 2016 .

^ Day 2006 , p. 386.

^ Day 2006 , p. 385.

^ Day 2006 , p. 395.

^ Day 2006 , p. 387.

^ Kirkpatrick, David D. (August 25, 2004).

"THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE REPUBLICAN AGENDA; Draft G.O.P. Platform Backs Bush on Security, Gay Marriage and Immigration" .

New York Times . Retrieved October 3, 2018 .

^ Hanson, Mark J.

"Culture of Life, Culture of Death" (PDF) . University of Montana.

^ Rajkumar, Rahul (May 26, 2005).

"CAFTA will hurt people with HIV" .

The Boston Globe . Retrieved October 3, 2018 .

^ a b Ransom, Jan; Tempera, Jacqueline (May 18, 2015).

"Religious leaders conflicted on death penalty" .

Boston Globe . Retrieved October 5, 2018 .

^ Sanger, Carol (May 2006).

"Infant Safe Haven Laws: Legislating in the Culture of Life" .

Columbia Law Review .

106 (4).

^ a b c d Evangelium vitae , p. 12.

^ Evangelium vitae , pp. 7–8.

^ Pook, Sally (March 28, 2005).

"Cardinal attacked over abortion link to Nazi eugenics" .

The Telegraph .

^ Dennehy, Raymond.

"Liberal Democracy as a Culture of Death: Why John Paul II Was Right" (PDF) .

IgnatiusInsight.com . Archived from the original (PDF) on May 17, 2017 . Retrieved November 28, 2016 .

^ Blanke, Hermann-Josef; Villalón, Pedro Cruz; Klein, Tonio; Ziller, Jacques (2015).

Common European Legal Thinking . Springer. pp.

391– 402.

ISBN 9783319193007 .

^ Smith, Wesley J. (2000).

Culture of Death: The Assault on Medical Ethics in America . Encounter Books.

ISBN 9781893554061 .

^ Watson, Bradley C. S. (2002).

Courts and the Culture Wars . Lexington Books. pp.

45– 62.

ISBN 9780739104156 .

^ Pasquini, John J. (2003).

Pro-Life: Defending the Culture of Life Against the Culture of Death . iUniverse.

ISBN 9780595297795 .

^ Dietrich, David R. (2014).

Rebellious Conservatives: Social Movements in Defense of Privilege . Springer. pp.

155– 165.

ISBN 9781137429186 .

^ "College Campus Outreach" . Archived from the original on January 4, 2007.

^ Dowbiggin, Ian (2003).

A Merciful End: The Euthanasia Movement in Modern America . Oxford University Press. p. i-xix.

ISBN 9780198035152 .

^ Hartman, Andrew (2015).

A War for the Soul of America . University of Chicago Press. p. 155.

ISBN 9780226254647 .

^ Slane, Andrea (2001).

A Not So Foreign Affair . Duke University Press. p. 80.

ISBN 9780822380849 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Pope Paul VI (July 25, 1968).

"Humanae vitae" .

Pope John Paul II (March 25, 1995).

"Evangelium vitae" .

Day, Kristen (2006).

"Politics and the Culture of Life – Why I am Still a Democrat" .

Notre Dame Journal of Law, Ethics, and Public Policy .

20 : 383– 399.

Further reading [ edit ] "Pope ends visit with frank talk", State Journal Register , Springfield, Illinois (August 16, 1993) "Bush Woos Catholics On Abortion Nominee, Echoes Pope's 'Culture Of Life' Phrase", Boston Globe (October 9, 2000) External links [ edit ] White House statement on Terri Schiavo "It should be our goal as a nation to build a culture of life, where all Americans are valued, welcomed, and protected..." USCCB – The United States Council of Catholic Bishops Pro-Life site including many articles on the Catholic Church's varied aspects on the Culture of Life.

Bush Hails Progress Towards "Culture of Life" "President Bush told thousands of antiabortion marchers yesterday that his administration is making progress toward fostering a culture of life by enacting measures that limit abortion and stem cell research while expanding the legal definition of life." v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Christian democracy Principles Catholic social teaching Christian corporatism Christian ethics Christian humanism Common good Communitarianism Conservatism Christian Compassionate Liberal Progressive Social Consistent life ethic Cultural mandate Culture of life Dignity of labor Distributism Economic progressivism Familialism Human dignity Just war theory Liberalism Christian Catholicism Conservative Ordo Social Mixed economy Multiculturalism Neo-Calvinism Neo-Thomism Option for the poor Pan-European identity Person Dignity Theory Popularism Public morality Religious liberty Friendly separation of church and state Religious pluralism Social Gospel Social justice Social market economy Solidarity Sphere sovereignty Stewardship Environmentalism Environmental protection Subsidiarity in Catholicism Welfare State Philosophers Arizmendiarrieta Baader Barth Belloc Benedict XV Berggrav Blond Bonhoeffer Brague Cardijn Chesterton Day Dooyeweerd Escrivá Gebhardt Gilson Görres Groen Guardini Habsburg John XXIII John Paul II Ketteler De Koninck Korfanty Lamennais Leo XIII Leo XIV Lewis Manning Maritain Merton Milani Mounier Müller-Armack Murray Nell-Breuning Newman Ozanam Paul VI Pesch Pieper Pius XI Pottier Röpke Sheen Spaemann Stein Stomma Sturzo Tawney Tischner Toniolo Vogelsang Weigel Williams Politicians Adenauer Andreotti Antall Aznar Bayrou Beel Bidault Biden Bondevik Busch Buzek Caldera Clerides Cosgrave Daul De Gasperi Dehaene Donnelly Dzurinda Erhard Erzberger Fenech Adami Field Frei Gemayel Groen Haller Joseph Juncker Kaas Ketteler Klausener Kohl Komorowski Korfanty Kramp-Karrenbauer Kurz Kuyper Lacalle Pou Laschet Letta Leuger Lipinski Lubbers Martens Mattarella Mazowiecki Merkel Merz Metsola Mikołajczyk Moro Nile Quadros Pastrana Peterle Pethrus Popiel Portas Pöttering Prodi Raab Schäffer Schuman Schüssel Seipel Söder Stegerwald Stomma Strauss Sturzo Tajani Tindemans Vogelsang von der Leyen Wałęsa Weber Werner Windthorst Parties American Solidarity Party Austrian People's Party Christian Democracy Christian Democratic Appeal Christian Democratic and Flemish Christian Democratic Party Christian Democratic Party of Uruguay Christian Democratic People's Party Christian-Democratic Rebirth Party Christian Democratic Union of Germany Christian Social People's Party Christian Social Union in Bavaria Christian Union Centre Party Centrists for Europe Civic Platform Croatian Democratic Union Democratic Rally Democrats Fianna Fáil Fine Gael Kataeb Party National Action Party National Party Nationalist Party New Democracy Patriotic Union People's Party Polish People's Party Popular Republican Movement Prohibition Party VMRO-DPMNE Organisations Catholic Action Centrist Democrat International Christian Democrat Organization of America European People's Party European Christian Political Party Konrad Adenauer Foundation Conservative Christian Fellowship Centre for European Studies European Ideas Network Schuman Foundation Center for Public Justice Paneuropean Union World Movement of Christian Workers SIPDIC Documents Rerum novarum Populorum progressio Graves de communi re Quadragesimo anno Laborem exercens Sollicitudo rei socialis Centesimus annus Laudato si' Related topics Catholic Church and politics Christian left Christian anarchism Christian communism Christian socialism Christian right Christian libertarianism Christian nationalism Theoconservatism Clerical philosophers Ethical socialism Integralism Illiberal democracy Progressive Christianity Religious democracy Buddhist Islamic Jewish Mormon Social democracy Traditionalist Catholicism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Culture_of_life&oldid=1303630717 " Categories : Politics of the United States Anti-abortion movements Religion and politics Catholic theology of the body Catholic Church and abortion Culture Pope John Paul II George W. Bush Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Use mdy dates from June 2022 Articles lacking reliable references from September 2022 All articles lacking reliable references Articles needing more viewpoints from September 2022 Articles lacking reliable references from November 2019 Wikipedia introduction cleanup from December 2022 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from December 2022 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2018 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2018 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 03:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Culture of life 4 languages Add topic

