Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Publications Toggle Publications subsection 1.1 Books 1.2 Television 2 Personal life 3 Bibliography 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Richard Rudgley Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British author and television presenter (born 1961) Richard Rudgley (born 1961) is a British author and television presenter. He specialises on the topics of the usage of hallucinogens and intoxicants in society. He has also written about the Stone Age and about Paganism .
Rudgley completed a BA in Social anthropology and Religious studies and went on to do a M. St. and M. Phil. in Ethnology and Museum Ethnography at Oxford University .  He is married and lives in London.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Publications [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Rudgley's first book, The Alchemy of Culture: Intoxicants in Society (published in America under the title Essential Substances: A Cultural History of Intoxicants in Society ) was the first winner of the Prometheus Award, launched by the British Museum Press in 1991.

[ 1 ] His 1998 Lost Civilisations of the Stone Age addresses a popular audience. John Robb, reviewing it in Nature summarised it thus: Writing, surgery, drug use, monument building, detailed environmental knowledge, sophisticated artworks, technologies such as mining and smelting, language, musical instruments, tools fashioned with aesthetic sense as well as utilitarian function – all arose far earlier than either archaeologists have generally acknowledged or the public has imagined. The result is that we cannot consider our history as a simple story of the ‘rise’ from savage roots to a sophisticated present. Our ancestors, even tens of thousands of years ago, commanded surprising knowledge and expert skills.

He goes on to indicate both the strengths and weakness of the book: As Rudgley points out, with examples of ancient ingenuity abounding, there is no need to turn to ancient astronauts to explain civilization.

Rudgley almost always finds himself taking the minority view over controversies, and his conclusions are occasionally facile or follow discredited authorities. But throughout the book we find clear exposition, a refreshing straightforwardness about the complexity of the archaeological record, a willingness to explore many sides of an issue, and a zest for discovery that makes it a page-turner.

He takes Rudgley to task over his excessive extension of the meanings of the word "civilization" and his tendency to sweeping statements, treating all early societies alike and representing the exceptional as typical. He concludes: The alternative (which Rudgley pursues within many chapters) would be to take societies on their own terms and look for the meaning of each invention within a society rather than checking it off on a list of traits of ‘civilization’. Prehistoric people did many weird and wonderful things; the way to read this book is as an entertaining and enlightening account of prehistory’s greatest hits.

[ 3 ] In a review of the same work in Isis , however, archaeologist Denise Schmandt-Besserat is harshly critical, stating that Rudgley first fabricated a non-existent controversy about pre-historic cultures, then created heroes and villains by characterising archaeologists as "wicked morons who conspire to keep prehistory in obscurity". She suggests that Rudgley "uses data like a magician" picking data from all over the world and stretching back a million years to make his case and that "like the fancy gesturing of the magician that distracts the audience from the trick, the avalanche of erudition hides Rudgley's weak argumentation". She also criticises his use of the key terms 'prehistory' and 'civilisation', which he fails to define, arguing that he misuses them, and points out that he uses the term 'tribalism' to describe prehistoric cultures although we do not know if there were tribes in prehistory. She concludes that "One must grant that the alleged controversy and conspiracy, the simplistic plot and biased discussion, all help to make the book entertaining. The entertainment, however, comes at considerable cost", the cost being at the expense of the work of the prehistorians whose research made his book possible." [ 4 ] Rudgley's 2006 Pagan Resurrection , subtitled A Force for Evil or the Future of Western Spirituality?

posits the idea  that western civilisation, belief systems and attitudes have been formed by the " Odinic archetype". The influence of Christianity, he says, has been relatively recent and shallow. 
Rudgley spends much of the book emphasising the dark and violent side of Odin, according to Independent reviewer David V. Barrett, "committing the ultimate sin of any anthropologist or historian, back-projecting from highly selective examples of unpleasantness today and photo-fitting them to a distorted image from the mythological past". Barrett concludes that Rudgely's book is "a catalogue of racist individuals and organisations whose only connection with Odin, through very dubious links, is by assertion rather than argument." [ 5 ] Television [ edit ] Lost Civilisations of the Stone Age was turned into a television series for Channel 4 entitled Secrets of the Stone Age .

[ 6 ] He also presented Pagans in 2004.

[ 7 ] The Financial Times review of the 2004 Pagans series commented how Rudgley "is keen to 'sex up' history ... You can see the glee of the programme makers when Richard revealed the ingredients for his new four-part series – pagan rituals (naked maidens a speciality), bestiality, free love, violence, nudity." [ 8 ] The Times reviewer Joe Joseph remarked that Rudgley's "revelations" of how Stone Age people and "barbarians" were clever, and how "we were all pagans once" were statements of the obvious ..." [ 9 ] In 2006, Channel 4 broadcast another documentary presented by Rudgley entitled The Celts , which investigates the Celtic peoples of the British Isles and mainland Europe. The legend of King Arthur , the mysticism of the Druids , and warriors such as Boudica and Vercingetorix are covered as the programme attempts to unpick the facts from the fiction, about an ethnic group that were ultimately crushed by the might of Rome's legions.

Rudgley was also a writer on the 2002 Discovery Channel TV series Barbarians, Secrets of the Dark Ages .

Personal life [ edit ] Rudgley moved to London in the early 1980s and worked as a shop assistant in WHSmith in Notting Hill , and later as a hotel porter in Holland Park, later showing interest in a number of modern Pagan groups, but never becoming a member of any single organisation.

[ 10 ] He undertook fieldwork in China.

[ 11 ] Bibliography [ edit ] 1991, Alchemy of Culture: Intoxicants in Society ISBN 978-0-7141-1736-2 1998, Lost Civilisations of the Stone Age ISBN 978-0-09-922372-6 1999, Encyclopedia of Psychoactive Substances ISBN 978-0-349-11127-8 2000, Secrets of the Stone Age ISBN 978-0-7126-8452-1 2001, Wildest Dreams: An Anthology of Drug-Related Literature ISBN 978-0-349-11138-4 2002, Barbarians: Secrets of the Dark Ages ISBN 978-0-7522-6198-0 2006, Pagan Resurrection ISBN 0-7126-8096-9 References [ edit ] ^ a b Of Human Bondage: Perspectives on Addiction Symposium Program.

Smith College , 2005 ^ Pagan Resurrection cover blurb (2007).

^ John Robb, review of Lost Civilisations of the Stone Age , Nature , 19 November 1998, pp. 231–232 ^ Schmandt-Besserat, Denise "Reviewed work:
The Lost Civilizations of the Stone Age by Richard Rudgley" Isis Vol. 91, No. 3 (September 2000), pp. 579–580 ^ review by David V Barrett in the Independent Newspaper ^ Journeys through time . Channel 4 ^ Richard Rudgley presents 'Pagans' on Channel 4 . The Megalithic Portal. 14 July 2004 ^ A pagan's life? No thank you.

Europe Intelligence Wire 20 July 2004, Financial Times Ltd., Western Daily Press ^ 20 July 2004, Times Online ^ An interview with Richard Rudgley . 13 May 2016.

^ "Lost Civilisations Of The Stone Age by Richard Rudgley" .

www.penguin.co.nz . Retrieved 14 August 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Pagans homepage Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Poland Israel People Archaeology Data Service DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Richard_Rudgley&oldid=1304527379 " Categories : Alumni of St Cross College, Oxford British anthropologists British television presenters British writers Living people 1961 births British modern pagans Modern pagan writers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from August 2014 Use dmy dates from August 2014 This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 15:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Richard Rudgley Add languages Add topic

