Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 1963–1972: Short films and feature debut 2.2 1973–1989: Breakthrough and acclaim 2.3 1990–1999: Established director 2.4 2000–2015: Film and television work 2.5 2016–present 2.5.1 Upcoming projects 3 Filmmaking style and technique Toggle Filmmaking style and technique subsection 3.1 Slow motion and freeze frame 3.2 Cameo appearances 3.3 Religious guilt 3.4 Political corruption 3.5 Frequent collaborators 4 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 4.1 Marriages 4.2 Politics 4.3 Legal issues 4.4 Religious beliefs 5 Filmography 6 Other work Toggle Other work subsection 6.1 Film preservation 6.1.1 The World Cinema Project 6.1.2 The African Film Heritage Project 6.2 Film activism 6.3 Favorite films 7 Legacy and honors 8 Awards and nominations 9 Notes 10 See also 11 References 12 Works cited 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Martin Scorsese 95 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский संस्कृतम् Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 17 August 2025 .

American filmmaker (born 1942) "Scorsese" redirects here. For other people with the surname, see Scorsese (surname) .

For the song, see Martin Scorsese (song) .

Martin Scorsese Scorsese at the Berlinale in 2024 Born Martin Charles Scorsese ( 1942-11-17 ) November 17, 1942 (age 82) New York City, U.S.

Citizenship United States Italy Education New York University ( BA , MA ) Occupations Director producer screenwriter actor Years active 1962–present Works Full list Spouses Laraine Marie Brennan ​ ​ ( m.

1965; div.

1971) ​ Julia Cameron ​ ​ ( m.

1976; div.

1977) ​ Isabella Rossellini ​ ​ ( m.

1979; div.

1982) ​ Barbara De Fina ​ ​ ( m.

1985; div.

1991) ​ Helen Schermerhorn Morris ​ ​ ( m.

1999) ​ Partner Illeana Douglas (1989–1997) Children 3, including Domenica and Francesca Parents Charles Scorsese (father) Catherine Scorsese (mother) Awards Full list Signature Martin Charles Scorsese ( / s k ɔːr ˈ s ɛ s i / skor- SESS -ee , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Italian: [skorˈseːze, -se] ; born November 17, 1942) is an American filmmaker. One of the major figures of the New Hollywood era, he has received many accolades , including an Academy Award , four BAFTA Awards , three Emmy Awards , a Grammy Award , and three Golden Globe Awards . He has been honored with the AFI Life Achievement Award in 1997, the Film Society of Lincoln Center tribute in 1998, the Kennedy Center Honor in 2007, the Cecil B. DeMille Award in 2010, and the BAFTA Fellowship in 2012. Four of his films have been inducted into the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as "culturally, historically or aesthetically significant".

Scorsese received a Master of Arts degree from New York University 's Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development in 1968. His directorial debut, Who's That Knocking at My Door (1967), was accepted into the Chicago Film Festival . In the 1970s and 1980s, Scorsese's films , much influenced by his Italian-American background and upbringing in New York City, centered on macho-posturing men and explore crime, machismo, nihilism and Catholic concepts of guilt and redemption.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] His trademark styles of extensive use of slow motion and freeze frames , voice-over narration , graphic depictions of extreme violence and liberal use of profanity were first shown in Mean Streets (1973).

Scorsese won the Palme d'Or at Cannes with Taxi Driver (1976), which starred Robert De Niro as a disturbed Vietnam Veteran. De Niro became associated with Scorsese through eight more films including New York, New York (1977), Raging Bull (1980), The King of Comedy (1982), Goodfellas (1990), Casino (1995) and The Irishman (2019). In the following decades, he garnered box office success with a series of collaborations with Leonardo DiCaprio , including Gangs of New York (2002), The Aviator (2004), The Departed (2006), Shutter Island (2010), and The Wolf of Wall Street (2013). He worked with both De Niro and DiCaprio on Killers of the Flower Moon (2023). He also directed After Hours (1985), The Color of Money (1986), The Last Temptation of Christ (1988), The Age of Innocence (1993), Kundun (1997), Hugo (2011), and Silence (2016).

On television, he has directed episodes for the HBO series Boardwalk Empire (2010–2014) and Vinyl (2016), as well as the HBO documentary Public Speaking (2010) and the Netflix docu-series Pretend It's a City (2021). He has also directed several rock documentaries including The Last Waltz (1978), No Direction Home (2005), and Shine a Light (2008). He has explored film history in the documentaries A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies (1995) and My Voyage to Italy (1999).

[ 5 ] An advocate for film preservation and restoration , he has founded three nonprofit organizations: The Film Foundation in 1990, the World Cinema Foundation in 2007 and the African Film Heritage Project in 2017.

[ 6 ] Early life and education [ edit ] From left to right: Salvo Cuccia , Scorsese, and Vittorio De Seta at the 2005 Tribeca Film Festival Martin Charles Scorsese was born in the Flushing neighborhood of New York City's Queens borough on November 17, 1942.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] He grew up in the Little Italy neighborhood of the city's Manhattan borough.

[ 9 ] Both of his parents, Catherine Scorsese (née Cappa) and Charles Scorsese , worked in the Garment District . Charles was a clothes presser and actor, while Catherine was a seamstress and an actress.

[ 10 ] All four of Scorsese's grandparents were Italian immigrants from Sicily , hailing from Polizzi Generosa on his father's side and Ciminna on his mother's side.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The original surname of the family was Scozzese, meaning "Scot" or "Scottish" in Italian, and was changed to Scorsese because of a transcription error.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Scorsese was raised in a predominantly Catholic environment.

[ 7 ] As a boy, he had asthma and could not play sports or take part in any activities with other children, so his parents and his older brother would often take him to movie theaters; it was at this stage in his life that he developed a passion for cinema. He has spoken of the influence of Powell and Pressburger 's Black Narcissus (1947) and The Red Shoes (1948).

[ 16 ] As a teenager in the Bronx , he frequently rented Powell and Pressburger's The Tales of Hoffmann (1951) from a store that had one copy of the reel. He was one of only two people who regularly rented it; the other, George A. Romero , also became a director.

[ 17 ] Scorsese has named Sabu and Victor Mature as his favorite actors in his youth. He recalls his father taking him to see Jean Renoir 's The River (1951) and being fascinated by its depiction of India . He became "obsessed" with Renoir's La Grande Illusion (1937) when it was rereleased.

[ 18 ] He names John Ford 's The Quiet Man (1952) and The Searchers (1956) as formative influences.

[ 19 ] In a documentary on Italian neorealism , he commented on how Roberto Rossellini 's Rome, Open City (1945) and Vittorio De Sica 's Bicycle Thieves (1946) inspired him and influenced his view of his Sicilian roots. In his documentary Il Mio Viaggio in Italia ( My Voyage to Italy ), Scorsese noted that the Sicilian episode of  Rossellini's Paisà (1946), which he first saw on television with his relatives who were themselves Sicilian immigrants, had a significant impact on his life.

[ 20 ] He remembers responding "very strongly" to Alfred Hitchcock 's Vertigo (1958).

[ 21 ] He acknowledges owing a great debt to the French New Wave and has stated that "the French New Wave has influenced all filmmakers who have worked since, whether they saw the films or not." [ 22 ] He has also cited the works of Satyajit Ray , [ 20 ] Ingmar Bergman , [ 23 ] [ 24 ] Andrzej Wajda , [ 25 ] Michelangelo Antonioni , [ 26 ] Federico Fellini , [ 27 ] Ishirō Honda and Eiji Tsuburaya [ 28 ] as major influences on his career. Although there was no habit of reading at home, towards the end of the 1950s, Scorsese began to approach literature, being marked in particular by Fyodor Dostoevsky 's Notes from Underground (1864), James Joyce 's A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (1916) and Graham Greene 's The Heart of the Matter (1948).

[ 29 ] Scorsese attended the all-boys Cardinal Hayes High School in the Bronx, graduating in 1960.

[ 30 ] He had initially desired to become a priest , attending a preparatory seminary , but failed after the first year and was unable to attend Fordham University .

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] This gave way to cinema and consequently Scorsese enrolled in New York University 's Washington Square College (now known as the College of Arts and Science ), where he earned a bachelor's degree in English in 1964.

[ 30 ] [ 33 ] He went on to earn his Master of Arts from NYU's School of Education (now the Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development ) in 1968, [ 34 ] [ 35 ] a year after the school was founded.

[ 36 ] Career [ edit ] 1963–1972: Short films and feature debut [ edit ] While attending the Tisch School of the Arts, Scorsese made the short films What's a Nice Girl like You Doing in a Place like This?

(1963) and It's Not Just You, Murray!

(1964). His most famous short of the period is the darkly comic The Big Shave (1967), which features Peter Bernuth. The film is an indictment of America's involvement in Vietnam , suggested by its alternative title Viet '67 .

[ 37 ] Scorsese has mentioned on several occasions that he was greatly inspired in his early days at New York University by film professor Haig P. Manoogian .

[ 38 ] Scorsese's first professional job was when he was at NYU he was the assistant cameraman to cinematographer Baird Bryant on the John G. Avildsen directed short film Smiles (1964). Scorsese stated: "It was really important because they were filming on 35mm". He stated he was terrible at the job because he could not judge the distance of the focus. He also worked as a gaffer for Albert and David Maysles and as an editor for CBS News , the later of whom offered him a full time position, but Scorsese declined due to his pursuit in film.

[ 39 ] In 1967, Scorsese made his first feature-length film, the black and white I Call First , later retitled Who's That Knocking at My Door , with his fellow students actor Harvey Keitel and editor Thelma Schoonmaker , both of whom were to become long-term collaborators.

Roger Ebert saw the film at the 1967 Chicago International Film Festival and wrote, in Scorsese's first published review: "it brings together two opposing worlds of American cinema. On the one hand, there have been traditional films like Marty , View from the Bridge , On the Waterfront and David and Lisa -- all sincere attempts to function at the level where real lives are led and all suffering to some degree from their makers' romantic and idealistic ideas, about such lives. On the other hand, there have been experimental films from Jonas Mekas , Shirley Clarke and other pioneers of the New York underground. In The Connection , Shadows and Guns of the Trees , they used improvised dialog and scenes and hidden and hand-held cameras in an attempt to capture the freshness of a spontaneous experience ...

I Call First brings these two kinds of films together into a work that is absolutely genuine, artistically satisfying and technically comparable to the best films being made anywhere. I have no reservations in describing it as a great moment in American movies." [ 40 ] Scorsese became friends with the influential "movie brats" of the 1970s: Brian De Palma , Francis Ford Coppola , George Lucas and Steven Spielberg .

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] It was De Palma who introduced Scorsese to Robert De Niro .

[ 41 ] During this period, Scorsese worked as the assistant director and one of the editors on Michael Wadleigh 's documentary Woodstock (1970) and met actor–director John Cassavetes , who became a close friend and mentor.

[ 43 ] Scorsese met Roger Corman after coming to Hollywood to edit Medicine Ball Caravan and Corman, who had seen and liked Who's That Knocking at My Door , asked Scorsese to make a sequel to Bloody Mama (1970). This came to be Boxcar Bertha (1972).

[ 44 ] [ 43 ] It was Corman who taught Scorsese that entertaining films could be shot with very little money or time, preparing the young director well for the challenges to come. Following the film's release, Cassavetes encouraged Scorsese to make the films that he wanted to make, rather than someone else's projects.

1973–1989: Breakthrough and acclaim [ edit ] Robert De Niro acted in his first collaboration with Scorsese in the crime drama Mean Streets (1973).

Mean Streets was a breakthrough for Scorsese, Keitel and Robert De Niro .

Pauline Kael wrote: "Martin Scorsese's Mean Streets is a true original of our time, a triumph of personal filmmaking. It has its own hallucinatory look; the characters live in the darkness of bars, with lighting and color just this shade of lurid ... It's about American life here and now, and it doesn't look like an American movie, or feel like one. If it were subtitled, we could hail a new European or South American talent — a new Buñuel steeped in Verdi , perhaps." [ 45 ] By now the signature Scorsese style was in place: macho posturing, bloody violence, Catholic guilt and redemption, gritty New York locale (though the majority of Mean Streets was shot in Los Angeles), rapid-fire editing, and a soundtrack with contemporary music. Although the film was innovative, its wired atmosphere, edgy documentary style, and gritty street-level direction owed a debt to Cassavetes, Samuel Fuller and early Jean-Luc Godard .

[ 46 ] In 1974, actress Ellen Burstyn chose Scorsese to direct her in Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore , for which she won an Academy Award for Best Actress. Although well regarded, the film remains an anomaly in Scorsese's early career as it focuses on a central female character. Returning to Little Italy to explore his ethnic roots, Scorsese directed Italianamerican (1974), a documentary featuring his parents Charles and Catherine Scorsese.

Scorsese followed with Taxi Driver in 1976, which depicted a Vietnam veteran who takes the law into his own hands on New York's crime-ridden streets.

[ 47 ] The film established him as an accomplished filmmaker and also brought attention to cinematographer Michael Chapman , whose style tends towards high contrasts, strong colors, and complex camera movements. The film starred De Niro as the angry and alienated Travis Bickle , and co-starred Jodie Foster in a highly controversial role as an underage prostitute, with Harvey Keitel as her pimp.

[ 48 ] Taxi Driver also marked the start of a series of collaborations between Scorsese and writer Paul Schrader , whose influences included the diary of would-be assassin Arthur Bremer , John Ford 's The Searchers (1956), and Robert Bresson 's Pickpocket (1959).

[ 49 ] Already controversial upon its release, Taxi Driver hit the headlines again five years later, when John Hinckley Jr.

made an assassination attempt on then-president Ronald Reagan . He subsequently blamed his act on his obsession with Jodie Foster's Taxi Driver character (in the film, De Niro's character, Travis Bickle, makes an assassination attempt on a senator).

[ 50 ] Taxi Driver won the Palme d'Or at the 1976 Cannes Film Festival, [ 51 ] also receiving four Oscar nominations, including Best Picture . The critical and financial success of Taxi Driver encouraged Scorsese to move ahead with his first big-budget project: the highly stylized musical New York, New York . This tribute to Scorsese's home town and the classic Hollywood musical was a box-office failure. The film was the director's third collaboration with De Niro, co-starring with Liza Minnelli . The film is best remembered today for the title theme song, which was popularized by Frank Sinatra . Although possessing Scorsese's usual visual panache and stylistic bravura, many critics felt its enclosed studio-bound atmosphere left it leaden in comparison with his earlier work. Despite its weak reception, the film is regarded positively by some critics.

Richard Brody wrote: For Scorsese, a lifelong cinephile, the essence of New York could be found in its depiction in classic Hollywood movies. Remarkably, his backward-looking tribute to the golden age of musicals and noirish romantic melodramas turned out to be one of his most freewheeling and personal films.

[ 52 ] In 1977, he directed the Broadway musical The Act , starring Minnelli.

[ 53 ] The disappointing reception of New York, New York drove Scorsese into depression. By this stage Scorsese had developed a serious cocaine addiction. However, he did find the creative drive to make the highly regarded The Last Waltz , documenting the final concert by The Band . It was held at the Winterland Ballroom in San Francisco on Thanksgiving Day , 1976, and featured one of the most extensive lineups of prominent guest performers at a single concert, including Bob Dylan , Neil Young , Ringo Starr , Muddy Waters , Joni Mitchell , Van Morrison , Paul Butterfield , Neil Diamond , Ronnie Wood and Eric Clapton . However, Scorsese's commitments to other projects delayed the release of the film until 1978. Another Scorsese-directed documentary, titled American Boy , also appeared in 1978, focusing on Steven Prince, the cocky gun salesman who appeared in Taxi Driver . A period of wild partying followed, damaging Scorsese's already fragile health. Scorsese helped provide footage for the documentary Elvis on Tour .

By several accounts (Scorsese's included), De Niro saved Scorsese's life when he persuaded him to kick his cocaine addiction to make his highly regarded film Raging Bull .

Mark Singer summarized Scorsese's condition: He (Scorsese) was more than mildly depressed. Drug abuse, and abuse of his body in general, culminated in a terrifying episode of internal bleeding. Robert De Niro came to see him in the hospital and asked, in so many words, whether he wanted to live or die. If you want to live, De Niro proposed, let's make this picture—referring to Raging Bull , an as-told-to book by Jake LaMotta, the former world middleweight boxing champion, that De Niro had given him to read years earlier.

[ 54 ] Convinced that he would never make another movie, he poured his energies into making the violent biopic of middleweight boxing champion Jake LaMotta , calling it a kamikaze method of film-making.

[ 55 ] The film is widely viewed as a masterpiece and was voted the greatest film of the 1980s by Britain's Sight & Sound magazine.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] It received eight Oscar nominations, including Best Picture, Best Actor for De Niro, Best Supporting Actress for Cathy Moriarty , Best Supporting Actor for Joe Pesci and Scorsese's first for Best Director . De Niro won, as did Thelma Schoonmaker for editing, but Best Director went to Robert Redford for Ordinary People . From this work onwards, Scorsese's films are always labeled as "A Martin Scorsese Picture" on promotional material.

Raging Bull , filmed in high contrast black and white, is where Scorsese's style reached its zenith: Taxi Driver and New York, New York had used elements of expressionism to replicate psychological points of view, but here the style was taken to new extremes, employing extensive slow-motion , complex tracking shots , and extravagant distortion of perspective (for example, the size of boxing rings would change from fight to fight).

[ 58 ] Thematically too, the concerns carried on from Mean Streets and Taxi Driver : insecure males, violence, guilt, and redemption.

Scorsese collaborator Paul Schrader wrote the scripts for Taxi Driver (1976) and Raging Bull (1980).

Although the screenplay for Raging Bull was credited to Paul Schrader and Mardik Martin (who earlier co-wrote Mean Streets ), the finished script differed extensively from Schrader's original draft. It was rewritten several times by various writers including Jay Cocks . The final draft was largely written by Scorsese and De Niro.

[ 59 ] In 1997, the American Film Institute ranked Raging Bull as the twenty-fourth greatest American film of all time on their AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Movies list. In 2007, they ranked Raging Bull as the fourth American greatest film on their AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) list.

Scorsese's next project was his fifth collaboration with De Niro, The King of Comedy (1982). It is a satire on the world of media and celebrity, whose central character is a troubled loner who ironically becomes famous through a criminal act ( kidnapping ).

[ 60 ] The film was an obvious departure from the more emotionally committed films he had become associated with. Visually, it was far less kinetic than the style Scorsese had developed previously, often using a static camera and long takes.

[ 61 ] Here the expressionism of his previous work gave way to moments of almost total surrealism . It still bore many of Scorsese's trademarks, however.

The King of Comedy failed at the box office, but has become increasingly well regarded by critics in the years since its release. German director Wim Wenders numbered it among his 15 favorite films.

[ 62 ] In 1983, Scorsese made a brief cameo appearance in Anna Pavlova (also known as A Woman for All Time ), originally intended to be directed by one of his heroes, Michael Powell . This led to a more significant acting appearance in Bertrand Tavernier 's jazz film Round Midnight . He also made a brief venture into television, directing an episode of Steven Spielberg 's Amazing Stories .

With After Hours (1985), for which he won a Best Director Award at Cannes, Scorsese made an esthetic shift back to a pared-down, almost "underground" film-making style. Filmed on an extremely low budget, on location, and at night in the SoHo neighborhood of Manhattan, the film is a black comedy about one increasingly misfortunate night for a mild New York word processor ( Griffin Dunne ) and features cameos by such disparate actors as Teri Garr and Cheech & Chong . Along with the 1987 Michael Jackson music video " Bad ", in 1986 Scorsese made The Color of Money , a sequel to Robert Rossen 's The Hustler (1961) with Paul Newman , which co-starred Tom Cruise . Although adhering to Scorsese's established style, The Color of Money was Scorsese's first official foray into mainstream film-making. The film finally won Newman an Oscar and gave Scorsese the clout to finally secure backing for a project that had been a longtime goal for him: The Last Temptation of Christ .

In 1983, Scorsese began work on this long-cherished personal project.

The Last Temptation of Christ , based on the 1955 novel by Nikos Kazantzakis , retold the life of Christ in human rather than divine terms.

Barbara Hershey recalls introducing Scorsese to the book while they were filming Boxcar Bertha .

[ 63 ] The film was slated to shoot under the Paramount Pictures banner, but shortly before principal photography was to start, Paramount pulled the plug on the project, citing pressure from religious groups. In this aborted 1983 version, Aidan Quinn was cast as Jesus, and Sting was cast as Pontius Pilate . (In the 1988 version, these roles were played by Willem Dafoe and David Bowie respectively.) However, following his mid-1980s flirtation with commercial Hollywood, Scorsese made a major return to personal filmmaking with the project; Universal Pictures agreed to finance the film as Scorsese agreed to make a more mainstream film for the studio in the future (it eventually resulted in Cape Fear ).

[ 64 ] Even prior to its 1988 release, the film (adapted by Taxi Driver and Raging Bull veteran Paul Schrader) caused a massive furor, with worldwide protests against its perceived blasphemy effectively turning a low-budget independent film into a media sensation.

[ 65 ] Most of the controversy centered on the final passages of the film, which depicted Christ marrying and raising a family with Mary Magdalene in a Satan -induced hallucination while on the cross.

In 1986, Scorsese directed the 18-minute short film Bad featuring Michael Jackson and Wesley Snipes (in his film debut). The short also serves as a music video and was shot in the Hoyt–Schermerhorn Streets station in Brooklyn over a 6-week period during November and December 1986. Chapman was the film's cinematographer. The direction and choreography were heavily influenced by West Side Story (1961). Scorsese also noted the influence of Taxi Driver in Spike Lee 's documentary Bad 25 (2012).

[ 66 ] The short has been praised by critics as one of the greatest and most iconic videos of all time.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] That year, he had signed a deal with upstart major The Walt Disney Studios to produce and direct features, following the success of The Color of Money .

[ 70 ] Looking past the controversy, The Last Temptation of Christ gained critical acclaim and remains an important work in Scorsese's canon: an explicit attempt to wrestle with the spirituality underpinning his films up until that point. He received his second nomination for a Best Director Academy Award (again unsuccessfully, this time losing to Barry Levinson for Rain Man ). Scorsese directed "Life Lessons", one of three segments in the anthology film New York Stories (1989). Ebert gave the film a mixed review, while praising Scorsese's short as "really successful".

[ 71 ] 1990–1999: Established director [ edit ] Scorsese collaborated with Robert De Niro on numerous projects.

After a decade of films considered by critics to be mixed results, some considered Scorsese's gangster epic Goodfellas (1990) his return to directorial form, and his most confident and fully realized film since Raging Bull . De Niro and Joe Pesci offered a virtuoso display of Scorsese's bravura cinematic technique in the film and re-established, enhanced, and consolidated his reputation. After the film was released, Roger Ebert , a friend and supporter of Scorsese, named Goodfellas "the best mob movie ever". It is ranked No. 1 on Ebert's movie list for 1990, along with those of Gene Siskel and Peter Travers ', and is widely considered one of the director's greatest achievements.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] The film was nominated for six Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best Director, and Scorsese earned his third Best Director nomination but again lost to a first-time director, Kevin Costner ( Dances with Wolves ). Joe Pesci earned the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance. Scorsese and the film also won many other awards, including five BAFTA Awards, a Silver Lion and more. The American Film Institute placed Goodfellas at No. 94 on the AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Movies list. On the 2007 updated version, they moved Goodfellas up to No. 92 on the AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Movies list (10th Anniversary Edition) and put Goodfellas at No. 2 on their list of the top 10 gangster films (after The Godfather ).

In 1990, he released his only short-form documentary: Made in Milan about fashion designer Giorgio Armani . The following year brought Cape Fear , a remake of a cult 1962 movie of the same name and the director's seventh collaboration with De Niro. Another foray into the mainstream, the film was a stylized thriller taking its cues heavily from Alfred Hitchcock and Charles Laughton 's The Night of the Hunter (1955).

Cape Fear received a mixed critical reception and was lambasted in many quarters for its scenes depicting misogynistic violence. However, the lurid subject matter gave Scorsese a chance to experiment with visual tricks and effects. The film garnered two Oscar nominations. Earning $80 million domestically, it stood as Scorsese's most commercially successful release until The Aviator (2004), and then The Departed (2006). The film also marked the first time Scorsese used wide-screen Panavision with an aspect ratio of 2.39:1.

In 1990, Scorsese acted in a small role as Vincent van Gogh in the film Dreams by Japanese director Akira Kurosawa . Scorsese's 1994 cameo appearance in the Robert Redford film Quiz Show is remembered for the telling line: "You see, the audience didn't tune in to watch some amazing display of intellectual ability. They just wanted to watch the money." In 1994, Scorsese and producer Barbara De Fina formed the production company 
De Fina-Cappa.

[ 75 ] In the early 1990s, Scorsese also expanded his role as a film producer. He produced a wide range of films, including major Hollywood studio productions ( Mad Dog and Glory , Clockers ), low-budget independent films ( The Grifters , Naked in New York , Grace of My Heart , Search and Destroy , The Hi-Lo Country ), and even the foreign film Con gli occhi chiusi ( With Closed Eyes ).

Scorsese in 1995 The Age of Innocence (1993) was a significant departure for Scorsese, a period adaptation of the Edith Wharton novel about the constrictive high society of late-19th century New York. It was highly lauded by critics upon its original release but was a box office bomb , making an overall loss. As noted in Scorsese on Scorsese by editor–interviewer Ian Christie, the news that Scorsese wanted to make a film about a failed 19th-century romance raised many eyebrows among the film fraternity; all the more when Scorsese made it clear that it was a personal project and not a studio for-hire job.

Scorsese was interested in doing a "romantic piece", and he was strongly drawn to the characters and the story of Wharton's text. Scorsese wanted his film to be as rich an emotional experience as the book was to him rather than the traditional academic adaptations of literary works. To this end, Scorsese sought influence from diverse period films that had had an emotional impact on him. In Scorsese on Scorsese , he documents influences from films such as Luchino Visconti 's Senso and his Il Gattopardo ( The Leopard ) as well as Orson Welles 's The Magnificent Ambersons and also Roberto Rossellini's La prise de pouvoir par Louis XIV ( The Taking of Power by Louis XIV ). Although The Age of Innocence was ultimately different from these films in terms of narrative, story, and thematic concern, the presence of a lost society, of lost values as well as detailed re-creations of social customs and rituals continues the tradition of these films. It came back into the public eye, especially in countries such as the UK and France, but still is largely neglected in North America. The film earned five Academy Award nominations (including Best Adapted Screenplay for Scorsese), winning the Costume Design Oscar. This was his first collaboration with the Academy Award-winning actor Daniel Day-Lewis , with whom he would work again on Gangs of New York . This was Scorsese's first film to be shot on Super 35 format.

Casino (1995), like The Age of Innocence before it, focused on a tightly wound male whose well-ordered life is disrupted by the arrival of unpredictable forces. The fact that it was a violent gangster film made it more palatable to the director's fans who perhaps were baffled by the apparent departure of the earlier film.

Casino was a box office success, [ 76 ] and it received generally positive notices from critics. Comparisons were drawn to his earlier film Goodfellas , and Scorsese admitted Casino bore a superficial resemblance to it, but he maintained that the story was significantly larger in scope.

[ 77 ] Sharon Stone was nominated for the Best Actress Academy Award for her performance. During the filming, Scorsese played a background part as a gambler at one of the tables.

Scorsese still found time for a four-hour documentary in 1995, titled A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies , offering a thorough trek through American cinema. It covered the silent era to 1969, a year after which Scorsese began his feature career. He said, "I wouldn't feel right commenting on myself or my contemporaries." In the four-hour documentary, Scorsese lists the four aspects of the director he believes are the most important as (1) the director as storyteller; (2) the director as an illusionist: D. W. Griffith or F. W. Murnau, who created new editing techniques among other innovations that made the appearance of sound and color possible later on; (3) the director as a smuggler—filmmakers such as Douglas Sirk , Samuel Fuller, and Vincente Minnelli , who used to hide subversive messages in their films; and (4) the director as iconoclast. In the preface to this documentary, Scorsese states his commitment to the "Director's Dilemma", in which a successful contemporary director must be pragmatic about the realities of getting financing for films of personal esthetic interest by accepting the need of "making one film for the studio, and (then) making one for oneself." If The Age of Innocence alienated and confused some fans, then Kundun (1997) went several steps further, offering an account of the early life of Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama , the People's Liberation Army 's entry into Tibet , and the Dalai Lama's subsequent exile to India. Not only a departure in subject matter, Kundun saw Scorsese employing a fresh narrative and visual approach. Traditional dramatic devices were substituted for a trance-like meditation achieved through an elaborate tableau of colorful visual images.

[ 78 ] The film was a source of turmoil for its distributor, Buena Vista Pictures , which was planning significant expansion into the Chinese market at the time. Initially defiant in the face of pressure from Chinese officials, Disney has since distanced itself from the project, hurting Kundun ' s commercial profile. In the short term, the sheer eclecticism in evidence enhanced the director's reputation. In the long term, however, it appears Kundun has been sidelined in most critical appraisals of the director, mostly noted as a stylistic and thematic detour.

Kundun was Scorsese's second attempt to profile the life of a great religious leader, following The Last Temptation of Christ .

Bringing Out the Dead (1999) was a return to familiar territory, with the director and writer Paul Schrader constructing a pitch-black comic take on their own earlier Taxi Driver .

[ 79 ] Like earlier Scorsese-Schrader collaborations, its final scenes of spiritual redemption explicitly recall the films of Robert Bresson.

[ 80 ] (It is also worth noting that the film's incident-filled nocturnal setting is reminiscent of After Hours .) It received generally positive reviews, [ 81 ] although not the universal critical acclaim of some of his other films. It stars Nicolas Cage , Ving Rhames , John Goodman , Tom Sizemore , and Patricia Arquette .

On various occasions Scorsese has been asked to present the Honorary Academy Award during the Oscar telecast. In 1998, at the 70th Academy Awards , Scorsese presented the award to film legend Stanley Donen . When accepting the award Donen quipped, "Marty this is backwards, I should be giving this to you, believe me".

[ 82 ] In 1999, at the 71st Academy Awards , Scorsese and De Niro presented the award to film director Elia Kazan . This was a controversial pick for the academy due to Kazan's involvement with the Hollywood blacklist in the 1950s.

[ 83 ] Several members of the audience including Nick Nolte and Ed Harris refused to applaud Kazan when he received the award while others such as Warren Beatty , Meryl Streep , Kathy Bates , and Kurt Russell gave him a standing ovation.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] 2000–2015: Film and television work [ edit ] At the Gangs of New York screening at the 2002 Cannes Film Festival with Leonardo DiCaprio and Cameron Diaz In 1999, Scorsese directed a documentary on Italian filmmakers titled Il Mio Viaggio in Italia , also known as My Voyage to Italy . The documentary foreshadowed Scorsese's next project, the epic Gangs of New York (2002), influenced by (amongst many others) major Italian directors such as Luchino Visconti and filmed in its entirety at Rome's famous Cinecittà film studios. With a production budget said to be in excess of $100 million, Gangs of New York was Scorsese's biggest and arguably most mainstream venture to date. Like The Age of Innocence , it was set in 19th-century New York, although focusing on the other end of the social scale (and like that film, also starring Daniel Day-Lewis). The film marked the first collaboration between Scorsese and actor Leonardo DiCaprio , who became a fixture in later Scorsese films. The production was highly troubled, with many rumors referring to the director's conflict with Miramax Films boss Harvey Weinstein .

[ 86 ] The final cut of the movie ran to 168 minutes, while Scorsese's original cut was over 180 minutes long.

[ 87 ] Despite denials of artistic compromise, some felt that Gangs of New York was Scorsese's most conventional film, featuring standard film tropes that Scorsese had traditionally avoided, such as characters existing purely for exposition purposes and explanatory flashbacks .

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] [ 89 ] Even so, the film received generally positive reviews with the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reporting that 75 percent of the reviews for the film they tallied were positive and summarizing the critics writing, "Though flawed, the sprawling, messy Gangs of New York is redeemed by impressive production design and Day-Lewis's electrifying performance." [ 90 ] The film's central themes are consistent with Scorsese's established concerns: New York, violence as culturally endemic, and subcultural divisions down ethnic lines. Originally filmed for a release in the winter of 2001 (to qualify for Academy Award nominations), Scorsese delayed the final production of the film until after the beginning of 2002; Miramax Films consequently delayed the film until its release in the Oscar season of late 2002.

[ 91 ] Gangs of New York earned Scorsese his first Golden Globe for Best Director. In February 2003, Gangs of New York received 10 Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture, Best Director, and Best Actor for Daniel Day-Lewis; however, it did not win in any category.

The following year, Scorsese completed production of The Blues , an expansive seven-part documentary tracing the history of blues music from its African roots to the Mississippi Delta and beyond. Seven filmmakers including Wim Wenders, Clint Eastwood , Mike Figgis , and Scorsese himself each contributed a 90-minute film (Scorsese's entry was titled Feel Like Going Home ). In the early 2000s, Scorsese produced several films for up-and-coming directors, such as You Can Count on Me (directed by Kenneth Lonergan ), Rain (directed by Katherine Lindberg), Lymelife (directed by Derick Martini ) and The Young Victoria (directed by Jean-Marc Vallée ). At that time, he established Sikelia Productions .

[ 92 ] In 2003, producer Emma Tillinger Koskoff joined the company.

[ 93 ] Scorsese also produced several documentaries, such as The Soul of a Man (directed by Wim Wenders) and Lightning in a Bottle (directed by Antoine Fuqua ).

Scorsese (left) with Leonardo DiCaprio at the 2007 Marrakech International Film Festival Scorsese's film The Aviator (2004) is a lavish, large-scale biopic of eccentric aviation pioneer and film mogul Howard Hughes and reunited Scorsese with actor Leonardo DiCaprio. The film received highly positive reviews.

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] [ 97 ] [ 98 ] The film was a widespread box office success and gained Academy recognition.

The Aviator was nominated for six Golden Globe Awards , including Best Motion Picture-Drama , Best Director , Best Screenplay , and Best Actor-Motion Picture Drama for Leonardo DiCaprio. It won three, including Best Motion Picture-Drama and Best Actor-Motion Picture Drama. In January 2005 The Aviator became the most-nominated film of the 77th Academy Awards nominations, nominated in 11 categories including Best Picture. The film also garnered nominations in nearly all the other major categories, including a fifth Best Director nomination for Scorsese. Despite having the most nominations, the film won only five Oscars. Scorsese lost again, this time to director Clint Eastwood for Million Dollar Baby (which also won Best Picture).

No Direction Home is a documentary film by Scorsese that tells of the life of Bob Dylan, and his impact on American popular music and the culture of the 20th century. The film does not cover Dylan's entire career; it focuses on his beginnings, his rise to fame in the 1960s, his then- controversial transformation from an acoustic guitar-based musician and performer to an electric guitar-influenced sound and his "retirement" from touring in 1966 following an infamous motorcycle accident. The film was first presented on television in both the United States (as part of the PBS American Masters series) and the United Kingdom (as part of the BBC Two Arena series) on September 26 to 27, 2005. A DVD version of the film was released the same month. The film won a Peabody Award and the Grammy Award for Best Long Form Music Video . In addition, Scorsese received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Directing for a Documentary/Nonfiction Program , losing to Baghdad ER .

Scorsese at the 65th Annual Peabody Awards in mid-2006 Scorsese returned to the crime genre with the Boston-set thriller The Departed , based on the Hong Kong police drama Infernal Affairs (which is co-directed by Andrew Lau and Alan Mak ). The film continued Scorsese's collaboration with Leonardo DiCaprio and was the first time he worked with Matt Damon , Jack Nicholson , Mark Wahlberg , and Martin Sheen .

The Departed opened to widespread critical acclaim, with some proclaiming it as one of the best efforts Scorsese had brought to the screen since 1990's Goodfellas , [ 99 ] [ 100 ] and still others putting it at the same level as Scorsese's most celebrated classics Taxi Driver and Raging Bull .

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] With domestic box office receipts surpassing US$ 129.4 million, The Departed was Scorsese's highest-grossing film (not accounting for inflation) until 2010's Shutter Island .

The Departed earned Scorsese a second Golden Globe for Best Director, as well as a Critics' Choice Award, his first Directors Guild of America Award, and the Academy Award for Best Director. Presented with the latter, Scorsese poked fun at his track record of nominations, asking, "Could you double-check the envelope?" [ 103 ] The award was presented by his longtime friends and colleagues Francis Ford Coppola , George Lucas and Steven Spielberg .

The Departed also received the Academy Award for the Best Motion Picture of 2006, Best Adapted Screenplay, and Best Film Editing by longtime Scorsese editor Thelma Schoonmaker, her third win for a Scorsese film.

Shine a Light captures rock and roll band the Rolling Stones ' performing at New York City's Beacon Theatre on October 29 and November 1, 2006, intercut with brief news and interview footage from throughout their career. The film was initially scheduled for release on September 21, 2007, but Paramount Classics postponed its general release until April 2008. Its world premiere was at the opening of the 58th Berlinale Film Festival on February 7, 2008. "Marty did an amazing job of making us look great ..." observed drummer Charlie Watts . "It's all in the edits and the cuts. That's a movie maker rather than a guy just shooting a band onstage ... It's not Casablanca , but it's a great thing to have from our point of view, not being egotistical. It's a document." [ 104 ] In 2009, Scorsese signed a petition in support of director Roman Polanski , who had been detained while traveling to a film festival in relation to his 1977 sexual abuse charges , which the petition argued would undermine the tradition of film festivals as a place for works to be shown "freely and safely", and that arresting filmmakers traveling to neutral countries could open the door "for actions of which no-one can know the effects." [ 105 ] [ 106 ] On October 22, 2007, Daily Variety reported that Scorsese would reunite with Leonardo DiCaprio on a fourth picture, Shutter Island . Principal photography on the Laeta Kalogridis screenplay, based on the novel of the same name by Dennis Lehane , began in Massachusetts in March 2008.

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] In December 2007, actors Mark Ruffalo , Max von Sydow , Ben Kingsley , and Michelle Williams joined the cast, [ 109 ] [ 110 ] marking the first time these actors had worked with Scorsese. The film was released on February 19, 2010.

[ 111 ] On May 20, 2010, Shutter Island became Scorsese's highest-grossing film.

[ 112 ] In 2010, The Wall Street Journal reported that Scorsese was supporting the David Lynch Foundation 's initiative to help 10,000 military veterans overcome posttraumatic stress disorder through Transcendental Meditation ; [ 113 ] Scorsese has publicly discussed his own practice of TM.

[ 114 ] Scorsese at Cannes in 2010 Scorsese directed a television commercial for Chanel 's then-new men's fragrance, Bleu de Chanel , starring French actor Gaspard Ulliel . Filmed in New York City, it debuted online on August 25, 2010, and was released on TV in September 2010.

[ 115 ] Scorsese directed the series premiere for Boardwalk Empire , an HBO drama series, [ 116 ] starring Steve Buscemi and Michael Pitt , based on Nelson Johnson's book Boardwalk Empire: The Birth, High Times and Corruption of Atlantic City .

[ 117 ] Terence Winter , who wrote for The Sopranos , created the series. In addition to directing the pilot (for which he won the 2011 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing), Scorsese also served as an executive producer on the series.

[ 117 ] The series premiered on September 19, 2010, and ran for five seasons.

[ 117 ] Scorsese directed the three-and-a-half-hour documentary George Harrison: Living in the Material World about the life and music of former Beatles ' member George Harrison , which premiered in the United States on HBO over two parts on October 5 and 6, 2011.

[ 118 ] His next film Hugo is a 3D adventure drama film based on Brian Selznick 's novel The Invention of Hugo Cabret . The film stars Asa Butterfield , Chloë Grace Moretz , Ben Kingsley, Sacha Baron Cohen , Ray Winstone , Emily Mortimer , Christopher Lee , and Jude Law . The film has been met with critical acclaim [ 119 ] [ 120 ] and earned Scorsese his third Golden Globe Award for Best Director. The film was also nominated for 11 Academy Awards, winning five of them and becoming tied with Michel Hazanavicius 's film The Artist for the most Academy Awards won by a single film in 2011.

Hugo also won two BAFTA awards, among numerous other awards and nominations .

Hugo was Scorsese's first 3D film and was released in the United States on November 23, 2011.

[ 121 ] At the Tribeca Film Festival in 2007 Scorsese's 2013 film, The Wolf of Wall Street , [ 122 ] is an American biographical black comedy based on Jordan Belfort 's memoir of the same name. The screenplay was written by Terence Winter and starred Leonardo DiCaprio as Belfort, along with Jonah Hill , Matthew McConaughey , and others. The film marked the fifth collaboration between Scorsese and DiCaprio and the second between Scorsese and Winter after Boardwalk Empire . It was released on December 25, 2013. The film tells the story of a New York stockbroker, played by DiCaprio, who engages in a large securities fraud case involving illicit stock manipulation, by way of the practice of " pump and dump ". DiCaprio was given the award for Best Actor-Motion Picture Musical or Comedy at the 2014 Golden Globe Awards . The film was also nominated for Best Motion Picture-Musical or Comedy as well.

The Wolf of Wall Street was nominated for five Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Actor for Leonardo DiCaprio, Best Supporting Actor for Jonah Hill, Best Director for Martin Scorsese, and Best Adapted Screenplay for Terence Winter but did not win in any category.

[ 123 ] In a 2016 critics' poll conducted by the BBC , the film was ranked among the 100 greatest motion pictures since 2000.

[ 124 ] Scorsese and David Tedeschi made a documentary about the history of The New York Review of Books , titled The 50 Year Argument . It screened as a work in progress at the Berlin International Film Festival in February 2014 and premiered in June 2014 at the Sheffield DocFest .

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] It was also screened in Oslo , [ 127 ] and Jerusalem [ 128 ] before being shown on the BBC's Arena series in July [ 129 ] and at Telluride in August.

[ 130 ] In September, it was screened at the Toronto [ 131 ] and Calgary International Film Festivals , [ 132 ] and the New York Film Festival .

[ 133 ] It aired on HBO on September 29, 2014.

[ 134 ] Scorsese directed the pilot for Vinyl written by Terence Winter and George Mastras , with Mick Jagger producing and Mastras as showrunner . The series stars Bobby Cannavale as Richie Finestra, founder and president of a top-tier record label, set in 1970s New York City's drug-and sex-fueled music business as punk and disco were breaking out, all told through the eyes of Finestra trying to resurrect his label and find the next new sound. Filming began on July 25, 2014.

[ 135 ] Co-stars include Ray Romano , Olivia Wilde , Juno Temple , Andrew Dice Clay , Ato Essandoh , Max Casella , and James Jagger. On December 2, 2014, Vinyl was picked up by HBO.

[ 136 ] The series lasted one season. Scorsese has acted as executive producer of several indie films, like the 2014 The Third Side of the River (directed by his protege Celina Murga), another 2014 film Revenge of the Green Dragons (co-directed by Andrew Lau, whose film Infernal Affairs inspired The Departed ), [ 137 ] as well as Bleed for This and Free Fire .

[ 138 ] Scorsese directed The Audition , a short film that also served as a promotional piece for casinos Studio City in Macau and City of Dreams in Manila, Philippines . The short brought together Scorsese's long-time muses Leonardo DiCaprio and Robert De Niro for the first time under his direction. The short film featured the two actors, playing fictionalized versions of themselves, competing for a role in Scorsese's next film. It was Scorsese's first collaboration with De Niro in two decades.

[ 139 ] The film premiered in October 2015 in conjunction with the grand opening of Studio City.

[ 140 ] 2016–present [ edit ] Scorsese profiled author Fran Lebowitz in the Netflix series Pretend It's a City (2021).

Scorsese had long anticipated filming an adaptation of Shūsaku Endō 's novel Silence , a drama about the lives of two Portuguese Jesuit priests in Japan during the 17th century. He had originally planned Silence as his next project following Shutter Island.

[ 141 ] On April 19, 2013, financing was secured for Silence by Emmett/Furla Films , [ 142 ] and filming began in January 2015. By November 2016, the film had completed post-production. It was written by Jay Cocks and Scorsese, based on the novel, and stars Andrew Garfield , Liam Neeson , and Adam Driver .

[ 143 ] The film was released on December 23, 2016, to positive reviews from critics.

[ 144 ] [ 145 ] Scorsese was recognized as an Italian citizen by jus sanguinis in 2018.

[ 146 ] On January 10, 2019, Variety ' s Chris Willman reported that Scorsese's long-anticipated documentary of Bob Dylan's 1975 tour, the Rolling Thunder Revue , would be released by Netflix : " Rolling Thunder Revue: A Bob Dylan Story by Martin Scorsese captures the troubled spirit of America in 1975 and the joyous music that Dylan performed during the fall of that year. Part documentary, part concert film, part fever dream, Rolling Thunder is a one of a kind experience, from master filmmaker Martin Scorsese." [ 147 ] On April 25, 2019, it was announced that the documentary would be released on Netflix on June 12, 2019, with a concurrent theatrical engagement in twenty American, European, and Australian cities the night before, and an extended theatrical schedule in Los Angeles and New York so that the film will qualify for award consideration.

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] After years of development, principal photography on Scorsese's crime film The Irishman , based on the book I Heard You Paint Houses by Charles Brandt , began in August 2017, starring Robert De Niro, Joe Pesci, and Al Pacino .

[ 150 ] The film had its world premiere at the 57th New York Film Festival on September 27, 2019.

[ 151 ] It received a limited theatrical release on November 1, 2019, followed by digital streaming on November 27, 2019, on Netflix.

[ 152 ] In January 2020, The Irishman received ten Academy Award nominations, including for Best Picture , Best Director , Best Adapted Screenplay , and Best Supporting Actor for Pacino and Pesci.

[ 153 ] On December 29, 2020, the trailer for Scorsese's Netflix documentary series Pretend It's a City was released. The series features Fran Lebowitz and Scorsese as they delve into her personal beliefs and thoughts on New York City.

[ 154 ] The project was released January 8, 2021, on Netflix .

[ 155 ] This is Scorsese's second documentary featuring Lebowitz, the first being Public Speaking (2010), which was released on HBO .

[ 156 ] In October 2022, Scorsese and David Tedeschi premiered their collaborative film Personality Crisis: One Night Only , at the New York Film Festival. The film is a documentary about David Johansen , featuring both contemporary concert footage shot for the project as well as archival footage.

[ 157 ] Scorsese with Edgar Wright at the London Film Festival in 2023 In July 2019, Scorsese started scouting locations in preparation for the 2020 filming of his next film Killers of the Flower Moon , a film adaptation of the book of the same name by David Grann . Scorsese would team up with Leonardo DiCaprio for the sixth time and Robert De Niro for the tenth time .

[ 158 ] In December 2019, Scorsese's frequent cinematographer Rodrigo Prieto confirmed that Flower Moon was gearing up to start principal photography in March 2020, which was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic .

[ 159 ] In April 2020, it was announced that filming for Killers of the Flower Moon had been postponed indefinitely in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, that the potential cost of the film had ballooned to $200 million, and that Scorsese was in talks with Netflix or Apple to produce and distribute, with Paramount Pictures involved as a partner.

[ 160 ] [ 161 ] On May 27, 2020, Apple bought the production and distribution rights to the film, which was released theatrically by Paramount and streamed on Apple TV+ .

[ 162 ] Principal photography commenced in April 2021.

[ 163 ] It premiered at the 76th Cannes Film Festival on May 20, 2023, receiving a nine-minute standing ovation and was released theatrically on October 20, 2023.

[ 164 ] On May 16, 2023, while promoting Killers of the Flower Moon , Scorsese spoke about his eagerness to continue working, stating: "I'm old. I read stuff. I see things. I want to tell stories, and there's no more time." [ 165 ] It was nominated for ten Oscars, and seven Golden Globes, winning one for Best Actress in a Drama Lily Gladstone . That same year, he directed a commercial for Bleu de Chanel starring Timothée Chalamet .

[ 166 ] In 2024, Scorsese narrated the documentary film Made in England: The Films of Powell and Pressburger directed by David Hinton. Guy Lodge of Variety wrote: "Scorsese may not have directed this engaging tour through a vital filmography, but he narrates with palpable, personal devotion to his subject." [ 167 ] The film premiered at the Berlin International Film Festival where it was picked up for distribution by MUBI .

[ 168 ] Upcoming projects [ edit ] In November 2021, Scorsese was set to direct a biopic feature about rock band the Grateful Dead for Apple Studios featuring Jonah Hill .

[ 169 ] In July 2022, it was announced Scorsese would direct an adaptation of David Grann's non-fiction novel The Wager for Apple Studios , reteaming once again with DiCaprio.

[ 170 ] In May 2023, after meeting with Pope Francis , Scorsese said he was considering writing and directing a new film about Jesus.

[ 171 ] More details were revealed in January 2024, revealing that it would likely be Scorsese's next film and that he had co-written it with Kent Jones , based on the Shūsaku Endō novel A Life of Jesus .

[ 172 ] In 2023, during an interview with GQ , it was revealed that Scorsese was working on an adaptation of Marilynne Robinson 's Home with Todd Field and Jones.

[ 173 ] It was reported in February 2025 that Scorsese would be directing a mob movie set in Hawaii , starring and being co-produced by Dwayne Johnson , Leonardo DiCaprio and Emily Blunt . Johnson and Blunt pitched the plot to Scorsese and DiCaprio, which was described as being "a cross between Goodfellas and The Departed ", and Nick Bilton was hired as a screenwriter.

[ 174 ] In March 2025, it was announced that he would be adapting Robinson's Home for Apple TV+ with DiCaprio starring.

[ 175 ] Filmmaking style and technique [ edit ] Several recurring filmmaking techniques are identifiable in many of Scorsese's films. He has established a filmmaking history which involves repeat collaborations with actors, screenwriters, film editors, and cinematographers, sometimes extending over several decades, such as that with recurring cinematographers Michael Ballhaus , Robert Richardson , and Rodrigo Prieto .

Slow motion and freeze frame [ edit ] Scorsese is known for his frequent use of slow motion , for example, in Who's That Knocking at My Door (1967) and Mean Streets (1973).

[ 176 ] He is also known for using freeze frames , such as: in the opening credits of The King of Comedy (1983), throughout Goodfellas (1990), Casino (1995), The Departed (2006), and in The Irishman (2019). His blonde leading ladies are usually seen through the eyes of the protagonist as angelic and ethereal; they wear white in their first scene and are photographed in slow motion— Cybill Shepherd in Taxi Driver ; Cathy Moriarty 's white bikini in Raging Bull ; Sharon Stone's white minidress in Casino .

[ 177 ] This may be a nod to director Alfred Hitchcock.

[ 178 ] Scorsese often uses long tracking shots, [ 179 ] as seen in Taxi Driver , Goodfellas , Casino , Gangs of New York , and Hugo .

MOS sequences set to popular music or voice-over are regularly seen in his films, often involving aggressive camera movement or rapid editing.

[ 180 ] Scorsese sometimes highlights characters in a scene with an iris, an homage to 1920s silent film cinema (as scenes at the time sometimes used this transition). This effect can be seen in Casino (it is used on Sharon Stone and Joe Pesci), Life Lessons , The Departed (on Matt Damon), and Hugo . Some of his films include references/allusions to Westerns, particularly Rio Bravo , The Great Train Robbery , Shane , The Searchers , and The Oklahoma Kid . Slow motion flashbulbs and accented camera/flash/shutter sounds are often used, as is the song " Gimme Shelter " by The Rolling Stones heard in several of Scorsese's films: Goodfellas , Casino , and The Departed .

Cameo appearances [ edit ] Scorsese usually has a quick cameo in his films ( Who's That Knocking at My Door , Boxcar Bertha , Mean Streets , Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore , Taxi Driver , The King of Comedy , After Hours , The Last Temptation of Christ (albeit hidden under a hood), The Age of Innocence , Gangs of New York , Hugo , Killers of the Flower Moon ), he is also known to contribute his voice to a film without appearing on screen (e.g. as in The Aviator and The Wolf of Wall Street ). In The Age of Innocence , for example, he appears in the non-speaking role of a large format portrait photographer in one of the passing scenes of the film. He provides the opening voice-over narration in Mean Streets and The Color of Money ; plays the off-screen dressing room attendant in the final scene of Raging Bull , and provides the voice of the unseen ambulance dispatcher in Bringing Out the Dead .

[ 181 ] He also appears as the director of fictional newly formed Vatican Television in the Italian comedy In the Pope's Eye .

Religious guilt [ edit ] Guilt is a prominent theme in many of his films, as is the role of Catholicism in creating and dealing with guilt ( Who's That Knocking at My Door , Mean Streets , Raging Bull , Bringing Out the Dead , The Departed , Shutter Island , and The Irishman ). In a similar manner, Scorsese considered Silence a "passion project": it had been in development since 1990, two years after the release of his film The Last Temptation of Christ , which also contained strongly religious themes.

[ 182 ] When asked why he retained interest in a project dealing with strong theological themes for over 26 years, Scorsese said, As you get older, ideas go and come. Questions, answers, loss of the answer again and more questions, and this is what really interests me. Yes, the cinema and the people in my life and my family are most important, but ultimately as you get older, there's got to be more ...

Silence is just something that I'm drawn to in that way. It's been an obsession, it has to be done ... it's a strong, wonderful true story, a thriller in a way, but it deals with those questions.

[ 183 ] Political corruption [ edit ] More recently, his films have featured corrupt authority figures, such as policemen in The Departed [ 184 ] and politicians in Gangs of New York [ 185 ] and The Aviator .

[ 186 ] He is also known for his liberal usage of profanity, dark humor , and violence.

[ 187 ] Scorsese's interest in political corruption as depicted in his films was expanded further in his 2019 film The Irishman .

Richard Brody writing for The New Yorker found the main interpretation of the film to be a dark allegory of a realist reading of American politics and American society stating: The real-life Hoffa... (was) a crucial player in both gangland politics and the actual practical politics of the day, and the movie's key through line is the inseparability of those two realms.

The Irishman is a sociopolitical horror story that views much of modern American history as a continuous crime in motion, in which every level of society—from domestic life through local business through big business through national and international politics—is poisoned by graft and bribery, shady deals and dirty money, threats of violence and its gruesome enactment, and the hard-baked impunity that keeps the entire system running.

[ 188 ] Frequent collaborators [ edit ] Further information: Martin Scorsese and Robert De Niro and Martin Scorsese and Leonardo DiCaprio See also: List of film director and actor collaborations Scorsese often casts the same actors in his projects, particularly Robert De Niro, who has collaborated with Scorsese on ten feature films and one short film. Included are the three films ( Taxi Driver , Raging Bull , and Goodfellas ) that made AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Movies list. Scorsese has often said he thinks De Niro's best work under his direction was Rupert Pupkin in The King of Comedy . After the turn of the century, Scorsese found a new muse with younger actor Leonardo DiCaprio, collaborating on six feature films and one short to date.

[ 189 ] Several critics have compared Scorsese's new partnership with DiCaprio with his previous one with De Niro.

[ 190 ] [ 191 ] Frequent collaborators also include: Victor Argo (6), Harvey Keitel (6), Harry Northup (6), J. C. MacKenzie (5), Murray Moston (5), Illeana Douglas (4), Joe Pesci (4), Frank Vincent (3), Barry Primus (3), and Verna Bloom (3). Others who have appeared in multiple Scorsese projects include Daniel Day-Lewis, who had become very reclusive to the Hollywood scene, Alec Baldwin , Willem Dafoe, Ben Kingsley, Jude Law, Dick Miller , Liam Neeson, Emily Mortimer, Jesse Plemons , John C. Reilly , David Carradine , Barbara Hershey, Kevin Corrigan , Jake Hoffman , Frank Sivero , Ray Winstone and Nick Nolte . Before their deaths, Scorsese's parents, Charles Scorsese and Catherine Scorsese , appeared in bit parts, walk-ons or supporting roles, such as in Goodfellas .

[ 192 ] For his crew, Scorsese frequently worked with editors Marcia Lucas [ 193 ] and Thelma Schoonmaker, [ 194 ] cinematographers Michael Ballhaus , [ 195 ] Robert Richardson , Michael Chapman and Rodrigo Prieto , screenwriters Paul Schrader, Mardik Martin, Jay Cocks, Terrence Winter, John Logan and Steven Zaillian , costume designer Sandy Powell , production designers Dante Ferretti and Bob Shaw, music producer Robbie Robertson , and composers Howard Shore [ 196 ] and Elmer Bernstein .

[ 197 ] Schoonmaker, Richardson, Powell, and Ferretti have each won Academy Awards in their respective categories on collaborations with Scorsese. Elaine and Saul Bass , the latter being Hitchcock's frequent title designer, designed the opening credits for Goodfellas , The Age of Innocence , Casino and Cape Fear .

Personal life [ edit ] Marriages [ edit ] Scorsese has been married five times.

[ citation needed ] In 1965, Scorsese married Laraine Marie Brennan. They have a daughter, Catherine, who was named after Scorsese's mother.

[ 198 ] The couple remained together until 1971.

[ citation needed ] In 1976, Scorsese married writer Julia Cameron . They have a daughter, Domenica Cameron-Scorsese , [ 199 ] an actress who appeared in The Age of Innocence .

After one year of marriage, the couple had an acrimonious divorce which served as the basis of Cameron's first feature, the dark comedy God's Will , [ 200 ] which also starred their daughter.

[ 201 ] [ 202 ] The latter had a small role in Cape Fear using the name Domenica Scorsese and has continued to act, write, direct and produce.

[ 203 ] In 1979, Scorsese married actress Isabella Rossellini . The couple divorced in 1983.

[ 204 ] In March 1983, Scorsese met Dawn Steel (then-junior executive at Paramount ) at an annual ShoWest Convention (in Las Vegas, Nevada), after which the pair began a romantic relationship.  Scorsese moved from New York to live in her Sunset Plaza residence while his Last Temptation of Christ was initially in development at Paramount (Steel reportedly recused herself from her boyfriend's passion project). In her 1993 memoir, Steel discussed their relationship, including attending the Cannes Film Festival premiere of The King of Comedy and later location scouting in Tunisia together. The two would reconnect professionally in 1987, jump-starting the restoration of Lawrence of Arabia (shortly after Steel's installation as president at Columbia Pictures ).

[ 205 ] In 1985, Scorsese married producer Barbara De Fina . The couple divorced in 1991.

From 1989 to 1997, Scorsese was romantically involved with actress Illeana Douglas .

[ 206 ] In 1999, Scorsese married Helen Schermerhorn Morris. They have a daughter, actress and filmmaker Francesca , who appeared in his films The Departed , Hugo , and The Aviator , and had a leading role in HBO / Sky 's miniseries We Are Who We Are in 2020.

[ 207 ] [ 208 ] Politics [ edit ] Scorsese was an opponent of the Iraq War , wearing a white dove pin to the 75th Academy Awards in 2003 and clapping for Michael Moore 's acceptance speech wherein he criticized President George W. Bush and the invasion.

[ 209 ] [ 210 ] In June 2025, Scorsese said of Donald Trump's administration : "I do not see compassion in this administration. Indeed, it seems that it takes pleasure in the opposite: hurting, humiliating." [ 211 ] Legal issues [ edit ] In March 2024, Scorsese settled a lawsuit with aspiring screenwriter Simon Afram.

[ 212 ] [ 213 ] Afram accused him of pocketing $500,000 to help handle casting, production and postproduction of his screenplay about World War II's Operation Fortitude , which was titled Operation Fortitude , only for Scorsese to then do nothing.

[ 212 ] [ 213 ] Religious beliefs [ edit ] Scorsese previously identified as a lapsed Catholic , declaring "I'm a lapsed Catholic. But I am Roman Catholic ; there's no way out of it." [ 214 ] In 2016, Scorsese identified himself as a Catholic again, saying, "my way has been, and is, Catholicism. After many years of thinking about other things, dabbling here and there, I am most comfortable as a Catholic. I believe in the tenets of Catholicism." [ 32 ] Filmography [ edit ] Main article: Martin Scorsese filmography As of 2023 [update] , Scorsese has directed 26 full-length narrative films and 16 full-length documentary films.

Directed narrative features Year Title Distributor 1967 Who's That Knocking at My Door Joseph Brenner Associates 1972 Boxcar Bertha American International Pictures 1973 Mean Streets Warner Bros.

1974 Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore 1976 Taxi Driver Columbia Pictures 1977 New York, New York United Artists 1980 Raging Bull 1982 The King of Comedy 20th Century Fox 1985 After Hours Warner Bros.

1986 The Color of Money Buena Vista Distribution 1988 The Last Temptation of Christ Universal Pictures 1990 Goodfellas Warner Bros.

1991 Cape Fear Universal Pictures 1993 The Age of Innocence Columbia Pictures 1995 Casino Universal Pictures 1997 Kundun Buena Vista Distribution 1999 Bringing Out the Dead Paramount Pictures / Buena Vista International 2002 Gangs of New York Miramax Films 2004 The Aviator Warner Bros. Pictures / Miramax Films 2006 The Departed Warner Bros. Pictures 2010 Shutter Island Paramount Pictures 2011 Hugo 2013 The Wolf of Wall Street 2016 Silence 2019 The Irishman Netflix 2023 Killers of the Flower Moon Paramount Pictures / Apple TV+ Other work [ edit ] Film preservation [ edit ] Main articles: The Film Foundation and World Cinema Project Scorsese had been at the forefront in film preservation and restoration ever since 1990, when he created The Film Foundation , a non-profit film organization which collaborates with film studios to restore prints of old or damaged films. Scorsese launched the organization with Woody Allen , Robert Altman , Francis Ford Coppola , Clint Eastwood , Stanley Kubrick , George Lucas , Sydney Pollack , Robert Redford , and Steven Spielberg , who all sat on the foundation's original board of directors.

[ 215 ] In 2006, Paul Thomas Anderson , Wes Anderson , Curtis Hanson , Peter Jackson , Ang Lee and Alexander Payne joined them.

[ 216 ] In 2015, Christopher Nolan also joined the board.

[ 217 ] Recent members include Spike Lee , Sofia Coppola , Guillermo del Toro , Barry Jenkins , Lynne Ramsay , Joanna Hogg and Kathryn Bigelow .

[ 218 ] The foundation has restored more than 800 films from around the world and conducts a free educational curriculum for young people on the language and history of film. Scorsese and the Foundation spearheaded fundraising for the film restoration of Michael Powell , and Emeric Pressburger 's The Red Shoes (1948).

[ 219 ] For his advocacy in film restoration he received the Robert Osborne Award at the 2018 TCM Film Festival . The award was given to Scorsese as "an individual who has significantly contributed to preserving the cultural heritage of classic films".

[ 220 ] In November 2020, The Criterion Channel released a 30-minute video titled, 30 Years of The Film Foundation: Martin Scorsese and Ari Aster in Conversation , celebrating the "mission, evolution, and ongoing work of The Film Foundation". Scorsese stated as of 2020, the Foundation has helped restore 850 films.

On April 20, 2024, Scorsese partnered with Seth MacFarlane to showcase Back From the Ink: Restored Animated Shorts at the 2024 TCM Classic Film Festival . Macfarlane and Scorsese funded the restoration, and worked with the UCLA Film and Television Archive and The Film Foundation with Paramount Pictures Archives .

[ 221 ] [ 222 ] The World Cinema Project [ edit ] In 2007, Scorsese established the World Cinema Project with the mission to preserve and present marginalized and infrequently screened films from regions generally ill-equipped to preserve their own cinema history.

[ 223 ] Scorsese's organization has worked with the Criterion Collection to not only preserve the films but to allow them to be released on DVD and Blu-ray boxsets and on streaming services such as The Criterion Channel .

[ 224 ] Films in the WCP include Ousmane Sembène 's Black Girl (1966), and Djibril Diop Mambéty 's Touki Bouki (1973).

The Criterion Collection so far has released four Vol. boxsets on DVD and Blu-ray , titled, Martin Scorsese's World Cinema Project . The first Volume includes 6 titles, Touki Bouki (1973), Redes (1936), A River Called Titas (1973), Dry Summer (1964), Trances (1981) and The Housemaid (1960).

[ 225 ] The second volume also includes 6 titles, Insiang (1976), Mysterious Object at Noon (2000), Revenge (1989), Limite (1931), Law of the Border (1967), and Taipei Story (1985).

[ 226 ] The third volume includes 6 titles as well: Lucía (1968), After the Curfew (1954), Pixote (1980), Dos monjes (1934), Soleil Ô (1970), and Downpour (1972). The 6 films included in the fourth set are Sambizanga (1972), Prisioneros de la tierra (1939), Chess of the Wind (1979), Muna Moto (1975), Two Girls on the Street (1939), and Kalpana (1948).

The African Film Heritage Project [ edit ] In 2017, Scorsese also introduced The African Film Heritage Project (AFHP), which is a joint initiative between Scorsese's non-profit The Film Foundation , UNESCO , Cineteca di Bologna , and the Pan African Federation of Filmmakers (FEPACI).

[ 227 ] The project aims to locate and preserve 50 classic African films, some thought lost and others beyond repair, with hopes to make them available to audiences everywhere. In an interview with Cinema Escapist in 2018, Scorsese talked about the ambitious collaboration saying, "Our first goal is to launch and conduct a thorough investigation in film archives and laboratories around the world, in order to locate the best surviving elements—original negatives, we hope—for our first 50 titles." [ 228 ] He also stated that "Restoration is always the primary goal, of course, but within the initiative, it's also a starting point of a process that follows through with exhibition and dissemination in Africa and abroad. And of course, our restoration process always includes the creation of preservation elements." [ 228 ] In 2019, the AFHP, announced that they would screen restorations of four African films on their home continent for the first time as part of the 50th anniversary of the Pan African Film Festival of Ouagadougou . The movies in question are Med Hondo 's Soleil Ô (1970), Mohammed Lakhdar-Hamina 's Chronique des années de braise (1975), Timité Bassori 's La Femme au couteau (1969), and Jean-Pierre Dikongue-Pipa 's Muna Moto (1975).

[ 229 ] Film activism [ edit ] Scorsese has mentioned his mentors being such filmmakers as John Cassavetes , Roger Corman , and Michael Powell .

[ 230 ] In film critic Roger Ebert 's book, Scorsese by Ebert , Ebert praised Scorsese for championing and supporting other filmmakers by serving as an executive producer on projects of filmmakers such as Antoine Fuqua , Wim Wenders , Kenneth Lonergan , Stephen Frears , Allison Anders , Spike Lee , and John McNaughton .

[ 231 ] More recently he has executive produced the films of the Safdie Brothers , Joanna Hogg , Kornél Mundruczó , Josephine Decker , Danielle Lessovitz , Alice Rohrwacher , Jonas Carpignano , Amélie van Elmbt, and Celina Murga.

[ 232 ] [ 233 ] Scorsese has also chosen to name filmmakers throughout the years that he admires such as fellow New York City-based directors Woody Allen and Spike Lee , as well as other artists such as Wes Anderson , Bong Joon-ho , Greta Gerwig , Ari Aster , Kelly Reichardt , Claire Denis , Noah Baumbach , Paul Thomas Anderson , Christopher Nolan , the Coen Brothers , and Kathryn Bigelow .

[ 234 ] [ 235 ] [ 236 ] [ 237 ] [ 238 ] [ 239 ] Favorite films [ edit ] Scorsese listed Pickup on South Street as one of his favorite films.

[ 240 ] The Band Wagon is his favorite musical.

[ 241 ] In 2012, Scorsese participated in the Sight & Sound film polls of that year. Held every ten years to select the greatest films of all time, contemporary directors were asked to select ten films of their choice. Scorsese, however, picked 12, which are listed below in alphabetical order: [ 242 ] 2001: A Space Odyssey (US/UK,1968) 8½ (Italy, 1963) Ashes and Diamonds (Poland, 1958) Citizen Kane (US, 1941) The Leopard (Italy, 1963) Paisà (Italy, 1946) The Red Shoes (UK, 1948) The River (US, 1951) Salvatore Giuliano (Italy, 1962) The Searchers (US, 1956) Ugetsu (Japan, 1953) Vertigo (US, 1958) Ten years later, Scorsese participated again in the Sight & Sound polls, picking 15 films, the same 12 of the 2012 list, plus the following: [ 243 ] Diary of a Country Priest (France, 1951) Ikiru (Japan, 1952) Ordet (Denmark, 1955) In 1999, after the death of Gene Siskel , Scorsese joined Roger Ebert as the guest co-host for an episode of Siskel & Ebert where they each stated their 10 favorite films of the 1990s.

[ 244 ] [ 245 ] Scorsese's list numerically is: The Horse Thief (China, 1986) The Thin Red Line (US, 1998) A Borrowed Life (Taiwan, 1994) Eyes Wide Shut (US/UK, 1999) Bad Lieutenant (US, 1992) Breaking the Waves (Denmark/UK, 1996) Bottle Rocket (US, 1996) Crash (Canada, 1996) Fargo (US, 1996) Malcolm X (US, 1992) and Heat (US, 1995) (tie) In 2012, Scorsese recommended 39 foreign films to Colin Levy .

[ 246 ] In 2019, Martin Scorsese contributed his list of favorite films to LaCinetek, a streaming platform that compiles film lists from filmmakers worldwide.

[ 247 ] As a tireless cinephile, Scorsese submitted two lists: one featuring 73 "founding" films and another "alternative list" with 106 films.

[ 248 ] He also included a letter to Cédric Klapisch , one of LaCinetek's founders, explaining his selections and noting that many filmmakers and films he admires are not included in these lists.

[ 249 ] Legacy and honors [ edit ] Scorsese receives the Golden Lion for Lifetime Achievement from actress Monica Vitti at the Venice Film Festival in 1995.

Scorsese's films have been nominated for numerous awards both nationally and internationally, with an Academy Award win for The Departed . In 1991, he received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement .

[ 250 ] In 1997, Scorsese received the AFI Life Achievement Award . In 1998, the American Film Institute placed three Scorsese films on their list of the greatest American movies: Raging Bull at No. 24, Taxi Driver at No. 47, and Goodfellas at No. 94. For the tenth-anniversary edition of their list , Raging Bull was moved to No. 4, Taxi Driver was moved to No. 52, and Goodfellas was moved to No. 92.

[ 251 ] In 2001, the American Film Institute placed two Scorsese films on their list of the most "heart-pounding movies" in American cinema : Taxi Driver at No. 22 and Raging Bull at No. 51. At a ceremony in Paris, France, on January 5, 2005, Martin Scorsese was awarded the French Legion of Honour in recognition of his contribution to cinema. On February 8, 2006, at the 48th Annual Grammy Awards , Scorsese was awarded the Grammy Award for Best Long Form Music Video for No Direction Home .

Lynda Myles organized a retrospective of Scorsese's work at the Edinburgh International Film Festival in 1975.

[ 252 ] In 2007, Scorsese was listed among Time magazine's 100 Most Influential People in The World.

[ 253 ] In August 2007, Scorsese was named the second-greatest director of all time in a poll by Total Film magazine, in front of Steven Spielberg and behind Alfred Hitchcock.

[ 254 ] In 2007, Scorsese was honored by the National Italian American Foundation (N.I.A.F.) at the nonprofit's thirty-second Anniversary Gala. During the ceremony, Scorsese helped launch N.I.A.F.'s Jack Valenti Institute in memory of former foundation board member and past president of the Motion Picture Association of America (M.P.A.A.) Jack Valenti. The Institute provides support to Italian film students in the U.S. Scorsese received his award from Mary Margaret Valenti, Jack Valenti's widow. Certain pieces of Scorsese's film-related material and personal papers are contained in the Wesleyan University Cinema Archives, to which scholars and media experts from around the world may have full access.

[ 255 ] On September 11, 2007, the Kennedy Center Honors committee, which recognizes career excellence and cultural influence, named Scorsese as one of the honorees for the year. On June 17, 2008, the American Film Institute placed two of Scorsese's films on the AFI's 10 Top 10 list: Raging Bull at number one for the Sports genre and Goodfellas at number two for the Gangster genre. In 2013, the staff of Entertainment Weekly voted Mean Streets the seventh greatest film ever made.

[ 256 ] Leon Fleisher , Martin Scorsese, Diana Ross , Brian Wilson and Steve Martin with President George W. Bush and Laura Bush in 2007 On January 17, 2010, at the 67th Golden Globe Awards , Scorsese was the recipient of the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award . On September 18, 2011, at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards , Scorsese won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for his work on the series premiere of Boardwalk Empire . In 2011, Scorsese received an honorary doctorate from the National Film School in Lodz . At the awards ceremony he said, "I feel like I'm a part of this school and that I attended it," paying tribute to the films of Wajda, Munk, Has, Polanski and Skolimowski.

[ 257 ] King Missile wrote " Martin Scorsese " in his honor. On February 12, 2012, at the 65th British Academy Film Awards , Scorsese was the recipient of the BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award .

Scorsese's motion picture star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame On September 16, 2012, Scorsese won two Emmy Awards for Outstanding Directing for Nonfiction Programming and Outstanding Nonfiction Special for his work on the documentary George Harrison: Living in the Material World .

[ 258 ] In 2013, the National Endowment for the Humanities selected Scorsese for the Jefferson Lecture , the U.S. federal government's highest honor for achievement in the humanities . He was the first filmmaker chosen for the honor.

[ 259 ] His lecture, delivered on April 1, 2013, at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts , was titled "Persistence of Vision: Reading the Language of Cinema".

[ 260 ] Scorsese was appointed to the Polish Gold Medal for Merit to Culture – Gloria Artis on April 11, 2017, in recognition of his contribution to Polish cinema.

[ 261 ] He received the Medal on May 29, 2025.

[ 262 ] Jon Stewart with Scorsese at the Peabody Awards in 2006 Scorsese has also garnered favorable responses from numerous film giants including Ingmar Bergman, [ 263 ] Frank Capra , [ 264 ] Jean-Luc Godard, [ 265 ] Werner Herzog , [ 266 ] Elia Kazan , [ 267 ] Akira Kurosawa, [ 268 ] David Lean , [ 269 ] Michael Powell, [ 270 ] Satyajit Ray, [ 271 ] and François Truffaut .

[ 272 ] He was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 2008.

[ 273 ] He was awarded an Honorary Doctorate from the University of Oxford on June 20, 2018.

[ 274 ] As of 2021, four of Scorsese's films ( Mean Streets , Taxi Driver , Raging Bull , and Goodfellas ) have been selected by the Library of Congress for preservation in the National Film Registry for being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".

[ 275 ] In commenting on Scorsese's 2019 film The Irishman , Guillermo del Toro cited Scorsese's ability as a director for the depiction of character development comparable to the films of "Renoir, Bresson, Bergman, Oliveira or Kurosawa".

[ 276 ] Sam Mendes , in his acceptance speech after winning the 2020 Golden Globe Award for Best Director for 1917 , praised Scorsese's contribution to cinema, stating, "There's not one director in this room, not one director in the world, that is not in the shadow of Martin Scorsese... I just have to say that." [ 277 ] Bong Joon-ho , in his acceptance speech for the 2020 Academy Award for Best Director for Parasite , said, "When I was young and studying cinema, there was a saying that I carved deep into my heart, which is, the most personal is the most creative." He then said that this quote had come from Scorsese, which prompted the audience to give Scorsese a standing ovation.

[ 278 ] In 2021, lifelong friend George Lucas and his wife Mellody Hobson through the Hobson/Lucas Family Foundation made a donation to NYU to establish the Martin Scorsese Institute of Global Cinematic Arts.

[ 279 ] Awards and nominations [ edit ] Main article: List of awards and nominations received by Martin Scorsese Accolades for Scorsese's features Year Title Academy Awards BAFTA Awards Golden Globe Awards Nominations Wins Nominations Wins Nominations Wins 1974 Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore 3 1 7 4 2 1976 Taxi Driver 4 7 3 2 1977 New York, New York 2 4 1980 Raging Bull 8 2 4 2 7 1 1983 The King of Comedy 4 1 1985 After Hours 1 1 1986 The Color of Money 4 1 2 1988 The Last Temptation of Christ 1 2 1990 Goodfellas 6 1 7 5 5 1991 Cape Fear 2 2 2 1993 The Age of Innocence 5 1 4 1 4 1 1995 Casino 1 2 1 1997 Kundun 4 1 2002 Gangs of New York 10 12 1 5 2 2004 The Aviator 11 5 14 4 6 3 2006 The Departed 5 4 6 6 1 2011 Hugo 11 5 9 2 3 1 2013 The Wolf of Wall Street 5 4 2 1 2016 Silence 1 2019 The Irishman 10 10 5 2023 Killers of the Flower Moon 10 9 7 1 Total 101 20 102 23 68 11 Notes [ edit ] See also [ edit ] Martin Scorsese's unrealized projects References [ edit ] ^ Scorsese, Martin (November 23, 2008). "Return to Queens Blvd.".

Entourage . Season 5. Episode 12.

HBO .

^ Kermode, Mark ; Simon Mayo (October 20, 2023).

Mark Kermode reviews Killers of the Flower Moon .

Kermode and Mayo's Take .  3:00 minutes in.

Archived from the original on January 11, 2024 . Retrieved December 22, 2023 – via YouTube.

^ Barnett, Christopher B.; Elliston, Clark J. (September 16, 2019).

Scorsese and Religion .

Brill Publishers .

ISBN 978-90-04-41140-1 .

Archived from the original on January 26, 2021 . Retrieved November 16, 2020 .

^ Ebiri, Bilge (December 30, 2016).

"Holy Men, Holy Losers: Scorsese, Silence and the Mystery of Faith" .

The Village Voice .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2017 . Retrieved February 14, 2017 .

^ Bradshaw, Nick (May 7, 2024).

"Made in England: The Films of Powell and Pressburger" .

Sight and Sound . Retrieved May 15, 2024 .

^ "Martin Scorsese on the importance of film restoration" .

CBS News . March 12, 2023.

Archived from the original on May 3, 2023 . Retrieved May 3, 2023 .

^ a b Jason Ankeny (2012).

"Martin Scorsese" . Movies & TV Dept.

The New York Times . Archived from the original on February 10, 2012 . Retrieved January 5, 2012 .

^ "Martin Scorsese: Telling Stories through Film" The Washington Times , November 30, 2007 ^ "Martin Scorsese Biography" .

National Endowment for the Humanities .

Archived from the original on February 26, 2014 . Retrieved January 24, 2014 .

^ "Martin Scorsese Biography (1942–2011)" . Filmreference.com.

Archived from the original on January 13, 2010 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ Casillo, Robert (2006).

"The Immigrant Generations: Italianamerican " .

Gangster Priest – The Italian American cinema of Martin Scorsese . Canada: University of Toronto Press. p. 3.

ISBN 9780802091130 .

Archived from the original on December 27, 2020 . Retrieved October 3, 2020 .

^ Dubois, Régis (2019).

"Résurrection" .

Martin Scorsese, l'infiltré (in French). France: Nouveau Monde Editions.

ISBN 9782369427780 .

Archived from the original on December 27, 2020 . Retrieved October 3, 2020 .

^ "Martin Scorsese è ora cittadino italiano" .

Sky TG24 . September 26, 2018.

Archived from the original on June 22, 2019 . Retrieved April 18, 2020 .

^ "Martin Scorsese è cittadino italiano: trascritto atto di nascita a Polizzi" . PalermoToday.

Archived from the original on August 3, 2020 . Retrieved April 18, 2020 .

^ "Una lunga ricerca per avere la cittadinanza: ma adesso Martin Scorsese è italiano" .

La Repubblica . September 26, 2018.

Archived from the original on December 27, 2020 . Retrieved April 18, 2020 .

^ "Black Narcissus (The Criterion Collection) (2001) DVD commentary" .

Criterion . January 30, 2001.

Archived from the original on November 4, 2013 . Retrieved October 27, 2013 .

^ "Romero – master of the macabre" . Eye for Film.

Archived from the original on July 23, 2015 . Retrieved July 23, 2015 .

^ Martin Scorsese on Jean Renoir's The River .

^ Martin Scorsese on the films of John Ford .

American Masters .

^ a b Chris Ingui.

"Martin Scorsese hits DC, hangs with the Hachet" . Hatchet. Archived from the original on August 26, 2009 . Retrieved June 6, 2009 .

^ Martin Scorsese on Vertigo .

British Film Institute .

^ "New Wave Film Guide: Nouvelle Vague & International New Wave Cinema – Where to Start" . Newwavefilm.com.

Archived from the original on January 13, 2012 . Retrieved January 5, 2012 .

^ Jay Antani (2004).

"Raging Bull: A film review" .

Filmcritic.com . Archived from the original on December 8, 2007 . Retrieved May 4, 2009 .

^ Ingmar Bergman Foundation.

"Ingmar Bergman" . 193.10.144.136. Archived from the original on April 26, 2012 . Retrieved January 5, 2012 .

^ "Martin Scorsese's Top 10" .

Criterion . January 29, 2014.

Archived from the original on November 4, 2023 . Retrieved February 19, 2024 .

^ Andre Soares (March 19, 2009).

"Martin Scorsese on Michelangelo Antonioni" . Altfg.com.

Archived from the original on July 8, 2012 . Retrieved January 5, 2012 .

^ Martin Scorsese praises Federico Fellini and 'La Dolce Vita' on YouTube ^ Ragone, August (May 6, 2014).

Eiji Tsuburaya: Master of Monsters (paperback ed.). Chronicle Books. p. 180.

ISBN 978-1-4521-3539-7 .

^ Schickel, Richard (2011).

Conversations with Scorsese . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. pp.

114– 115.

ISBN 978-0307595461 .

^ a b "Scorsese, Martin" .

encyclopedia.com .

Archived from the original on January 8, 2020 . Retrieved January 9, 2020 .

^ Wilson 2011 , p. 28.

^ a b Cindy Wooden (December 10, 2016).

"Filmmaker Martin Scorsese talks about his faith, upcoming movie 'Silence' " .

National Catholic Reporter . Archived from the original on October 16, 2017 . Retrieved October 21, 2023 .

^ Raymond, Marc (May 2002).

"Martin Scorsese" .

sensesofcinema.com .

Senses of Cinema .

Archived from the original on December 25, 2010.

^ "NYU Tisch School of the Arts Receives Major Gift to Establish the Martin Scorsese Institute of Global Cinematic Arts" .

NYU Tisch .

Archived from the original on February 5, 2022 . Retrieved February 11, 2022 .

^ "Martin Scorsese" .

tisch.nyu.edu .

Archived from the original on December 27, 2020 . Retrieved January 9, 2020 .

^ "NYU College of Arts and Science" . Cas.nyu.edu. Archived from the original on April 6, 2012 . Retrieved January 5, 2012 .

^ Alistair Harkness (April 11, 2002). "Finding the boy again".

The Scotsman .

^ " "With Love and Resolution": An Appreciation" .

neh.gov .

Archived from the original on July 1, 2019 . Retrieved January 9, 2020 .

^ "Martin Scorsese on His First Jobs and a Camera Skill He Never Mastered - The Job Interview" .

The Wall Street Journal . October 18, 2023.

Archived from the original on October 20, 2023 . Retrieved October 22, 2023 .

^ Ebert, Roger (November 17, 1967).

"I Call First / Who's That Knocking at My Door?" .

Chicago Sun-Times .

Archived from the original on December 27, 2020 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ a b Maurer, Daniel (June 9, 2016).

"Brian De Palma Shed Light on a Crazy Rumor About Martin Scorsese and Taxi Driver" .

bedfordandbowery.com .

Archived from the original on November 11, 2018 . Retrieved January 9, 2020 .

^ Adams, Veronika (January 27, 2011).

Adams, Veronika Martin Scorsese Ebook.GD Publishing ISBN 1-61323-010-9 .

ISBN 9781613230107 .

^ a b Thompson, Howard (August 18, 1972).

"The Screen: 'Boxcar Bertha' Tops Local Double Bill" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 29, 2013.

^ Wilson 2011 , p. 33.

^ Kael, Pauline (October 8, 1973).

"Everyday Inferno" .

The New Yorker .

^ Hinson, Hal (November 24, 1991).

"Scorsese, Master Of The Rage" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 3, 2017 . Retrieved September 4, 2017 .

^ "Retro-Cast: Casting Taxi Driver In The 1990s" .

Screen Rant . September 25, 2021.

Archived from the original on April 11, 2023 . Retrieved February 10, 2024 .

^ "Taxi Driver" .

Turner Classic Movies .

Archived from the original on February 20, 2023 . Retrieved May 11, 2022 .

^ Thurman, John (April 5, 1976).

"Citizen Bickle, or the Allusive Taxi Driver: Uses of Intertextuality" . Sensesofcinema.com.

Archived from the original on January 28, 2012 . Retrieved January 5, 2012 .

^ MacNab, Geoffrey (July 6, 2006).

"I was in a bad place" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on July 20, 2008 . Retrieved May 12, 2010 .

^ "Festival Archives: Taxi Driver" . Festival de Cannes. Archived from the original on June 14, 2011 . Retrieved February 14, 2008 .

^ Brody, Richard (January 28, 2008).

"Top of the Heap" .

The New Yorker . DVD Notes (column). Archived from the original on January 24, 2008 . Retrieved July 25, 2013 .

^ Bailey, Jason (September 3, 2014).

"Martin Scorsese's Weirdest Projects – Page 2" .

Flavorwire .

Archived from the original on June 16, 2016 . Retrieved May 17, 2016 .

^ Singer, Mark (March 19, 2000).

"The Man Who Forgets Nothing" .

The New Yorker .

^ Williams, Alex (January 3, 2003).

"Are we ever going to make this picture?" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on February 10, 2008.

^ Malcolm, Derek (December 9, 1999).

"Martin Scorsese: Raging Bull" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on May 12, 2008.

^ Snider, Mike (February 7, 2005).

" 'Raging Bull' returns to the ring" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on May 12, 2012 . Retrieved September 4, 2017 .

^ "Raging Bull" . Eufs.org.uk. March 5, 2001. Archived from the original on April 30, 2009 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ Morris, Mark (October 31, 1999).

"Ageing bulls return" .

Observer . London.

Archived from the original on January 11, 2008.

^ "The King of Comedy Film Review" .

Timeout.com .

Archived from the original on January 10, 2008 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ evil jimi.

"The King of Comedy" . Ehrensteinland.com.

Archived from the original on March 26, 2009 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ "The Official Site" .

Wim Wenders . Archived from the original on June 18, 2002 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ "Boxcar Bertha" .

Turner Classic Movies .

Archived from the original on October 6, 2010 . Retrieved November 17, 2015 .

^ "Tom Pollock, Montecito Picture Company" (PDF) .

carseywolf.ucsb.edu . October 22, 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 3, 2021 . Retrieved November 12, 2021 .

^ "Martin Scorsese's The Last Temptation of Christ" .

Pbs.org .

Archived from the original on August 30, 2010 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ "Michael Jackson – Making Of Bad (BAD 25) Documentary" .

YouTube .

Archived from the original on November 21, 2020 . Retrieved November 26, 2020 .

^ "Michael Jackson's 'Bad': Quincy Jones, Wesley Snipes & Other Collaborators Tell the Stories of the Album's Five No. 1 Singles" .

Billboard .

Archived from the original on December 27, 2020 . Retrieved November 6, 2019 .

^ "From the Record Crate: Michael Jackson – "Bad" (1987)" .

The Young Folks . August 31, 2017.

Archived from the original on November 1, 2020 . Retrieved November 6, 2019 .

^ "How Michael Jackson's 'BAD' Music Video Influenced Fashion" .

UpscaleHype . September 5, 2018.

Archived from the original on December 27, 2020 . Retrieved November 6, 2019 .

^ Galbraith, Jane (November 12, 1986). "Scorsese In 2-Year Producing-Directing Deal At Walt Disney".

Variety . pp. 4, 23.

^ "New York Stories" .

Rogerebert.com .

Archived from the original on December 27, 2020 . Retrieved November 26, 2020 .

^ ":: rogerebert.com :: Reviews :: GoodFellas (xhtml)" . Rogerebert.suntimes.com. September 2, 1990.

Archived from the original on July 30, 2010 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ Dalton, Stephen.

"GoodFellas" .

The Hollywood Reporter .

Archived from the original on February 6, 2005 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ "GoodFellas (1990)" . Filmsite.org.

Archived from the original on January 10, 2010 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ "Films produced by De Fina-Cappa" .

Letterboxd .

Archived from the original on September 3, 2014 . Retrieved November 15, 2010 .

^ Foundas, Scott (May 7, 2013).

"Andrew Garfield to Star in Martin Scorsese's 'Silence' (EXCLUSIVE)" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on April 30, 2014.

^ "Beyond The Frame: Casino" .

American Cinematographer . 2016.

Archived from the original on December 27, 2020 . Retrieved November 1, 2020 .

^ "Kundun" .

Time Out .

Archived from the original on January 10, 2008 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ "New York Stories: A Complete Ranking of Martin Scorsese's Films Read More: Ranking Martin Scorsese's Movies From Best to Worst" .

ScreenCrush . December 20, 2013.

Archived from the original on April 28, 2014 . Retrieved April 18, 2014 .

^ "Reinert on Bringing Out the Dead" . Film-philosophy.com.

Archived from the original on June 29, 2011 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ "Bringing Out the Dead" .

rottentomatoes.com . October 22, 1999. Archived from the original on March 5, 2010 . Retrieved January 29, 2007 .

^ "Stanley Donen's Oscar Speech was an all time classic" .

IndieWire . February 23, 2019.

Archived from the original on March 21, 2020 . Retrieved March 20, 2020 .

^ Weinraub, Bernard (March 22, 1999).

"Amid Protests Elia azan Receives His Oscar" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 11, 2010 . Retrieved March 20, 2020 .

^ "Praise and silent protest greet Kazan's Oscar" .

The Guardian . March 22, 1999.

Archived from the original on March 21, 2020 . Retrieved March 20, 2020 .

^ "Many Refuse to Clap as Kazan Receives Oscar" .

The Los Angeles Times . March 22, 1999.

Archived from the original on March 21, 2020 . Retrieved March 20, 2020 .

^ "Gangs of Los Angeles" .

The Guardian . London. December 15, 2002.

Archived from the original on January 11, 2008 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ a b Peter Bradshaw (January 10, 2003).

"Gangs of New York" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on January 11, 2008 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ "Compare Prices and Read Reviews on Gangs of New York at" . Epinions.com. July 1, 2003. Archived from the original on October 12, 2007 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ Xan Brooks (January 9, 2003).

"Past master" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on January 11, 2008 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ "Gangs of New York" .

Rotten Tomatoes . December 20, 2002.

Archived from the original on January 5, 2012 . Retrieved January 5, 2012 .

^ "In briefs: Gangs of New York release delayed again" .

The Guardian . London. April 8, 2002.

Archived from the original on January 11, 2008 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ "Martin Scorsese" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2014 . Retrieved September 3, 2013 .

^ Tillinger named production president at Scorsese's Sikelia Archived February 24, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , screendaily.com, retrieved February 19, 2014 ^ "The Aviator" . Rottentomatoes.com. December 25, 2004.

Archived from the original on September 28, 2009 . Retrieved January 24, 2014 .

^ Brian Libby (February 2, 2005).

"Are you talking to me – again?" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on January 11, 2008 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ "Right guy, wrong film" . Melbourne: The Age. February 27, 2005.

Archived from the original on January 19, 2010 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ "Empire Reviews Central – Review of The Aviator" . Empireonline.com.

Archived from the original on January 18, 2012 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ Travers, Peter (December 15, 2004).

"Aviator: Review" .

Rolling Stone . Archived from the original on April 21, 2009 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ "Review: Departed, The" . Chud.com.

Archived from the original on December 17, 2007 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ "Movie Review – Departed, The" . eFilmCritic.

Archived from the original on February 28, 2010 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ "Reel Views" . Reel Views.

Archived from the original on July 7, 2010 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ "All Movie – The Departed" . Allmovie.com. October 6, 2006.

Archived from the original on January 24, 2010 . Retrieved January 5, 2012 .

^ " 'The Departed' Wins Best Picture, Scorsese Best Director" .

The New York Times . February 26, 2007.

Archived from the original on March 4, 2014 . Retrieved February 10, 2020 .

^ Lawrence, Will (May 2008). "King Charles".

Q . No. 262. p. 46.

^ "Le cinéma soutient Roman Polanski / Petition for Roman Polanski – SACD" .

archive.ph . June 4, 2012. Archived from the original on March 22, 2017 . Retrieved April 20, 2022 .

^ Shoard, Catherine; Agencies (September 29, 2009).

"Release Polanski, demands petition by film industry luminaries" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on June 28, 2019 . Retrieved June 12, 2019 .

^ Fleming, Michael (October 22, 2007).

"Scorsese, DiCaprio team for 'Island' " .

Variety .

Archived from the original on November 2, 2007 . Retrieved October 28, 2007 .

^ "Scorsese, Leo head to 'Shutter Island" . 2007. Archived from the original on March 4, 2009.

^ Tatiana Siegel (December 3, 2007).

"Kingsley signs on to 'Shutter Island' " .

Variety .

Archived from the original on January 6, 2008 . Retrieved January 8, 2008 .

^ Fleming, Michael (December 6, 2007).

"Michelle Williams joins 'Island' " .

Variety .

Archived from the original on January 10, 2008 . Retrieved January 8, 2008 .

^ McClintock, Pamela (February 13, 2008).

" 'Star Trek' pushed back to 2009" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2008 . Retrieved February 13, 2008 .

^ Grey, Brandon (May 21, 2010).

" 'Shutter Island' Is Scorsese's Top Movie Worldwide" .

Box Office Mojo .

Archived from the original on May 23, 2010 . Retrieved May 21, 2010 .

^ "Filmmaker Introduces Veterans to Meditation" .

The Wall Street Journal . November 26, 2010.

Archived from the original on February 22, 2014 . Retrieved February 13, 2014 .

^ Hoffman, Claire (February 22, 2013).

"David Lynch Is Back ... as a Guru of Transcendental Meditation" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 22, 2013 . Retrieved December 17, 2016 .

^ Grinnell, SunHee (August 23, 2010).

"Scorsese Dons Chanel" .

Vanity Fair .

Archived from the original on May 15, 2021 . Retrieved January 26, 2022 .

^ Nellie Andreeva (2008).

"Michael Pitt set for Scorsese's HBO pilot" .

The Hollywood Reporter . Archived from the original on September 7, 2014.

^ a b c " Boardwalk Empire website" .

Archived from the original on January 27, 2010 . Retrieved February 6, 2010 .

^ Trailer For Martin Scorsese's George Harrison: Living In The Material World on YouTube ^ "Hugo" .

Chicago Sun-Times . November 21, 2011.

Archived from the original on December 2, 2011.

^ "Empire's Hugo Movie Review" . Empireonline.com. December 5, 2006.

Archived from the original on January 18, 2012 . Retrieved January 5, 2012 .

^ "Global Sites & Release Dates" .

Paramount Pictures .

Archived from the original on October 28, 2011 . Retrieved August 11, 2011 .

^ Silver, Stephen.

"Scorsese, DiCaprio Team Again on 'Wolf of Wall Street' " .

Entertainmenttell . Technologytell.com.

Archived from the original on April 22, 2012 . Retrieved April 24, 2012 .

^ Brown, Tracy.

"Oscars 2014: The complete list of nominees and winners" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on March 2, 2014 . Retrieved March 3, 2014 .

^ "The 21st Century's 100 greatest films" .

BBC . August 23, 2016.

Archived from the original on January 31, 2017 . Retrieved January 31, 2017 .

^ Barnes, Henry.

"Sheffield Doc/Fest 2014 review: The 50 Year Argument – Scorsese's love letter to old media" Archived December 31, 2016, at the Wayback Machine , The Guardian , June 7, 2014 ^ "Martin Scorsese premiere for Sheffield Doc/Fest" Archived February 5, 2018, at the Wayback Machine , BBC News Online, May 8, 2014; Roddy, Michael.

"Scorsese says NY Review film meant as guide to young" Archived February 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , Chicago Tribune , February 15, 2014; and Han, Angie.

"Martin Scorsese Has a New York Review of Books Doc Premiering in Berlin" Archived April 17, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , Slashfilm.com, January 28, 2014 ^ Brady, M. Michael.

" The 50 Year Argument premiere in Scandinavia" Archived October 6, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , The Foreigner , June 12, 2014 ^ "Masters: The 50 Year Argument " Archived August 10, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , Jerusalem Film Festival, accessed September 12, 2014 ^ Dalton, Stephen.

" The 50 Year Argument : Sheffield Review" Archived September 1, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , The Hollywood Reporter , June 7, 2014 ^ Feinberg, Scott.

"Telluride: The 50 Year Argument Continues In the Rockies" Archived September 5, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , The Hollywood Reporter , September 2, 2014 ^ Powers, Thom.

" The 50 Year Argument " , TIFF.net, accessed September 3, 2014 Archived August 22, 2014, at the Wayback Machine ^ Volmers, Eric.

"Around the world with the Calgary International Film Festival: Full lineup announced" Archived October 6, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , The Calgary Herald , September 2, 2014 ^ The 50 Year Argument Archived August 23, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , Film Society of Lincoln Center, accessed September 9, 2014 ^ Thompson, Anne.

"HBO Dates Scorsese Doc on New York Review of Books , The 50 Year Argument " Archived August 14, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , IndieWire.com, August 11, 2014 ^ The Deadline Team (July 25, 2014).

"Mick Jagger Tweets From Set Of HBO's Untitled Rock 'N' Roll Drama – Deadline" .

Deadline . Archived from the original on August 8, 2014 . Retrieved September 12, 2015 .

^ Nellie Andreeva (December 2, 2014).

"Martin Scorsese, Mick Jagger, and Terence Winter's Rock 'N" Roll Drama Picked Up to Series by HBO" .

Archived from the original on December 3, 2014 . Retrieved December 2, 2014 .

^ "Meet Celina Murga, Director of 'La Tercera Orilla' & Martin Scorsese's BFF" .

Remezcla . February 19, 2014.

Archived from the original on September 16, 2015 . Retrieved September 12, 2015 .

^ Garrett, Stephen (April 24, 2017).

"Martin Scorsese and Ben Wheatley on 'Free Fire,' Gunfights and Crime Flicks" .

Rolling Stone .

Archived from the original on September 19, 2018 . Retrieved September 19, 2018 .

^ Reed, Ryan (January 14, 2015).

"Watch De Niro and DiCaprio Square Off in Scorsese Short" .

Rolling Stone .

Archived from the original on January 18, 2015 . Retrieved January 18, 2015 .

^ Gumuchian, Marie-Louise (October 27, 2015).

"De Niro, DiCaprio face off for role in Scorsese's "The Audition" " .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2016 . Retrieved November 12, 2016 .

^ Fleming, Michael (February 1, 2009).

"Scorsese, King talking up 'Silence' – Daniel Day-Lewis, Benicio Del Toro to star" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on October 13, 2010.

^ Jagernauth, Kevin (April 19, 2013).

"Martin Scorsese's 'Silence' Gets Funding, Will Shoot In July 2014" . Archived from the original on October 19, 2013 . Retrieved December 4, 2018 .

^ McNary, Dave (January 22, 2015).

"Martin Scorsese Locks Funding for 'Silence' " .

Variety .

Archived from the original on February 7, 2016 . Retrieved February 26, 2016 .

^ Ford, Rebecca (September 26, 2016).

"Martin Scorsese's 'Silence' Gets December Release Date" .

The Hollywood Reporter .

Archived from the original on September 26, 2016 . Retrieved September 26, 2016 .

^ Lang, Brent (September 26, 2016).

"Martin Scorsese's 'Silence' Lands Oscar-Season Release Date" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on September 27, 2016 . Retrieved September 26, 2016 .

^ "Scorsese cittadino italiano" .

ANSA.it (in Italian). September 26, 2018.

Archived from the original on September 26, 2018 . Retrieved September 26, 2018 .

^ Willman, Chris (January 10, 2019).

"Bob Dylan, Martin Scorsese Reunite for 'Rolling Thunder' Film, Coming to Netflix in 2019 (Exclusive)" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2019 . Retrieved April 20, 2019 .

^ Willman, Chris (April 25, 2019).

"Martin Scorsese's 'Rolling Thunder' Bob Dylan Doc Hits Netflix June 12 (EXCLUSIVE)" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on April 25, 2019 . Retrieved April 25, 2019 .

^ "Rolling Thunder Review: A Bob Dylan Story by Martin Scorsese" .

Milwaukee Film . Archived from the original on May 10, 2019 . Retrieved May 7, 2019 .

^ Tartaglione, Nancy; Busch, Anita; Jaafar, Ali (May 6, 2016).

"Martin Scorsese's 'The Irishman' Coming Together Quickly: Could This Be The Hottest Title At Cannes?" .

Deadline .

Archived from the original on May 7, 2016 . Retrieved May 7, 2016 .

^ Todd, Harry (July 29, 2019).

"Martin Scorsese's The Irishman Gets First-Look Photos, World Premiere Date" .

Paste .

Archived from the original on August 19, 2019 . Retrieved August 19, 2019 .

^ Fleming, Mike Jr. (August 27, 2019).

"Netflix Sets November 1 Theatrical Bow For Martin Scorsese-Directed 'The Irishman:' 27 Day US & UK Rollout Comes Before Pic Streams For Thanksgiving Holiday" .

Deadline .

Archived from the original on August 27, 2019 . Retrieved August 27, 2019 .

^ Donnelly, Matt (January 13, 2020).

"Netflix Leads Oscar Nominations for the First Time Behind 'Irishman,' 'Marriage Story' " .

Variety .

Archived from the original on January 25, 2020 . Retrieved January 25, 2020 .

^ "Martin Scorsese Reveals New Fran Lebowitz Doc, 'Pretend It's a City' " .

Rolling Stone . December 28, 2020.

Archived from the original on December 29, 2020 . Retrieved December 30, 2020 .

^ "Pretend It's a City Trailer: Martin Scorsese Presents Fran Lebowitz's New York" .

Vulture . December 28, 2020.

Archived from the original on December 29, 2020 . Retrieved December 30, 2020 .

^ "Fran Lebowitz vs. the World Talking (on a landline) with the star of Martin Scorsese's cranky, necessary love letter to New York, Pretend It's a City" .

Curbed . December 29, 2020.

Archived from the original on December 29, 2020 . Retrieved December 30, 2020 .

^ Complex, Valerie (October 16, 2022).

" 'Personality Crisis: One Night Only' Review: Martin Scorsese And David Tedeschi Rock Out To The Music Of New York Legend David Johansen" .

Deadline .

Archived from the original on October 27, 2022 . Retrieved October 28, 2022 .

^ "Robert De Niro Reportedly Joins Leonardo DiCaprio In Martin Scorsese's Crime Thriller 'Killers of The Flower Moon' " .

HN Entertainment . July 27, 2019.

Archived from the original on October 22, 2019 . Retrieved October 25, 2019 .

^ "Scorsese, DiCaprio's 'Flower Moon' Eyes March 2020 Start," by Zack Sharf. December 2, 2019, IndieWire .

[1] Archived December 27, 2019, at the Wayback Machine ^ Sharf, Zack (April 16, 2020).

"Postponement of Killers of the Flower Moon leads to a chance to be in the movie" .

KRMG . Archived from the original on August 11, 2020 . Retrieved August 11, 2020 .

^ Hersko, Tyler (April 10, 2020).

"Martin Scorsese Talking With Apple, Netflix to Distribute Next Film — Report" .

IndieWire .

Archived from the original on April 10, 2020 . Retrieved April 10, 2020 .

^ Fleming, Mike Jr. (May 27, 2020).

"Apple Partners With Paramount on Martin Scorsese and Leonardo DiCaprio's 'Killers of the Flower Moon' " .

Deadline Hollywood .

Archived from the original on May 28, 2020 . Retrieved May 27, 2020 .

^ Sharf, Zack (February 18, 2021).

"Jesse Plemons Takes Over DiCaprio's Original Role in Scorsese's 'Flower Moon' After Script Changes" .

IndieWire .

Archived from the original on February 28, 2021 . Retrieved February 23, 2021 .

^ Wiseman, Andreas (March 31, 2023).

"Martin Scorsese's 'Killers Of The Flower Moon' Officially Confirmed For Cannes Film Festival" .

Deadline .

Archived from the original on April 7, 2023 . Retrieved April 27, 2023 .

^ Fleming, Mike Jr. (May 16, 2023).

"Martin Scorsese, Leonardo DiCaprio & Robert De Niro On How They Found The Emotional Handle For Their Cannes Epic 'Killers Of The Flower Moon' " .

Deadline .

Archived from the original on May 20, 2023 . Retrieved May 20, 2023 .

^ "You won't even have time for a pee break during Martin Scorsese's 60-second perfume ad" .

AV Club . October 31, 2023.

Archived from the original on November 1, 2023 . Retrieved November 1, 2023 .

^ " 'Made in England: The Films of Powell and Pressburger' Review: Martin Scorsese Sends a Valentine to British Cinema's Great Dreamers" .

Variety . February 21, 2024 . Retrieved April 27, 2024 .

^ "Martin Scorsese-Narrated Documentary 'Made In England: The Films Of Powell And Pressburger' Gets U.S. Distribution Deals Ahead Of Berlin Premiere" .

Deadline Hollywood . February 21, 2024 . Retrieved April 27, 2024 .

^ Kroll, Justin (November 18, 2021).

"Jonah Hill To Play Jerry Garcia In Martin Scorsese-Directed Grateful Dead Pic For Apple" .

Deadline Hollywood .

Archived from the original on November 19, 2021 . Retrieved February 10, 2024 .

^ Grobar, Matt (July 29, 2022).

"Leonardo DiCaprio & Martin Scorsese Reteam For Apple Film 'The Wager' Based On David Grann Book" .

Deadline Hollywood .

Archived from the original on August 4, 2022 . Retrieved August 4, 2022 .

^ Vivarelli, Nick (May 29, 2023).

"Martin Scorsese Meets Pope Francis, Announces Film About Jesus – Report" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on May 29, 2023 . Retrieved May 29, 2023 .

^ Bergeson, Samantha (January 8, 2024).

"Martin Scorsese Confirms 'A Life of Jesus' Script Is Finished: 80-Minute Movie Will Not 'Proselytize' " .

Indiewire .

Archived from the original on January 8, 2024 . Retrieved January 9, 2024 .

^ "Martin Scorsese: "I Have To Find Out Who The Hell I Am." " .

GQ . September 25, 2023.

Archived from the original on September 25, 2023 . Retrieved September 25, 2023 .

^ "Martin Scorsese and Leonardo DiCaprio Attached to Hawaii-Set Crime Film From Dwayne Johnson and Emily Blunt" .

Variety . February 20, 2025 . Retrieved February 20, 2025 .

^ "Martin Scorsese's 'Home' Starring Leo DiCaprio Lands At Apple" .

ThePlaylist . March 10, 2025.

^ Martin Scorsese Archived December 25, 2010, at the Wayback Machine by Marc Raymond, Senses of Cinema (online), May 2002 ^ Martin Scorsese , Frankie's Films (online), January 2007 ^ "Hitchcock and Women" . Screenonline.org.uk.

Archived from the original on February 11, 2010 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ Coyle, Jake (December 29, 2007).

" "Atonement" brings the long tracking shot back into focus" .

Boston Globe .

Archived from the original on February 3, 2009.

^ Martin Scorsese's Comfortable State of Anxiety Archived December 17, 2012, at archive.today , by Timothy Rhys, MovieMaker Magazine (online), October 16, 2002 ^ Most Famous Film Director Cameos Archived May 10, 2008, at the Wayback Machine by Tim Dirks, Filmsite.org (online), 2008 ^ " Silence release date sets Martin Scorsese's passion project up for Oscars Archived December 1, 2016, at the Wayback Machine ".

The Independent.

September 27, 2016.

^ "Martin Scorsese to Make Noise on 'Silence' at Cannes; Emmett/Furla Funding The Film" .

Deadline Hollywood . April 19, 2013. Archived from the original on February 19, 2016 . Retrieved January 16, 2016 .

^ "Revisiting Southie's culture of death" Archived February 2, 2009, at the Wayback Machine , Michael Patrick MacDonald, The Boston Globe (online), October 11, 2006 ^ "Gangs of New York Review" Archived October 23, 2009, at the Wayback Machine , Roger Ebert , Chicago Sun-Times (online), December 20, 2002 ^ "High Rollers" Archived June 16, 2008, at the Wayback Machine , David Denby, The New Yorker (online), December 20, 2004 ^ Swindle, David (October 9, 2006).

"Martin Scorsese Retrospective" .

wthr.com . Archived from the original on April 29, 2016 . Retrieved February 26, 2016 .

^ "Watching The Irishman on Netflix Is the Best Way to See It." By Richard Brody. December 2, 2019.

The New Yorker .

[2] Archived December 3, 2019, at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Leo & Marty: Yes, Again!" . Movies.go.com. Archived from the original on April 1, 2008 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ "Scorsese Likens DiCaprio To De Niro" . Archived from the original on May 2, 2019 . Retrieved June 1, 2016 .

^ "Successful Hollywood Duos" .

Entertainment Weekly . November 30, 2007.

Archived from the original on July 3, 2009 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ Casillo, Robert (2006).

"The Immigrant Generations: Italianamerican " .

Gangster Priest: The Italian American Cinema of Martin Scorsese . University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 9780802091130 .

Archived from the original on May 14, 2019 . Retrieved January 21, 2020 .

^ uproxx (February 25, 2014).

"Martin Scorsese looks at the changing face of Oscar season over four decades" .

UPROXX .

Archived from the original on December 24, 2019 . Retrieved December 24, 2019 .

^ Labrecque, Jeff (February 11, 2014).

" 'Wolf of Wall Street's Thelma Schoonmaker on her historic partnership with Martin Scorsese" .

Entertainment Weekly .

Archived from the original on April 18, 2014.

^ Bosley, Rachael K.

"Michael Ballhaus, ASC takes on Martin Scorsese's Gangs of New York , a 19th-century tale of vengeance and valor set in the city's most notorious neighborhood" . Theasc.com.

Archived from the original on October 18, 2010 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ "The Aviator" . Scorsese Films. Archived from the original on February 12, 2010 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ Jeffries, Stuart (January 6, 2003).

"Some You Win" . Elmerbernstein.com. Archived from the original on July 21, 2009 . Retrieved March 3, 2010 .

^ "Martin Scorsese's Life in Photos" . November 17, 2022.

Archived from the original on June 18, 2023 . Retrieved June 18, 2023 .

^ "He lowkey slayed. #fyp #martinscorsese #dadsoftiktok #dadguesses" . Francesca Scorsese is giving her father, Martin Scorsese, slang words to guess on TikTok. Published October 5, 2023.

Archived from the original on October 6, 2023 . Retrieved October 6, 2023 .

^ Clarke Fountain (2014).

"God's Will (1989)" . Movies & TV Dept.

The New York Times . Archived from the original on April 23, 2014 . Retrieved April 18, 2014 .

^ Keyser, Les (1998).

Twayne's Filmmakers Series: Martin Scorsese .

Twayne Publishers : New York. p.

188 .

ISBN 978-0-8057-9321-5 . Retrieved February 27, 2016 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Piccalo, Gina (June 23, 2006).

"Agonizing success of 'Artist's Way' " .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on June 8, 2016 . Retrieved June 1, 2016 .

^ Malkin, Marc (April 16, 2007).

"Scorsese's Family Business" .

E!

.

Archived from the original on April 20, 2014 . Retrieved April 18, 2014 .

^ Halpern, Dan (April 30, 2006).

"Interview: Isabella Rossellini – Daddy's girl" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on April 18, 2014 . Retrieved April 18, 2014 .

^ Steel, Dawn (October 1, 1993).

They Can Kill You... But They Can't Eat You: Lessons from the Front . New York, NY: Pocket Books. pp.

167– 179.

ISBN 9780671738327 .

^ Jewel, Dan (March 1, 1999).

"Note Worthy" .

People .

Archived from the original on October 25, 2018 . Retrieved October 25, 2018 .

^ Miller, Julie (January 8, 2014).

"Read Martin Scorsese's Open Letter to His 14-Year-Old Daughter" .

Vanity Fair .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2020 . Retrieved April 28, 2021 .

^ Gonzales, Erica (October 30, 2020).

"Francesca Scorsese Is Ready to Make a Name for Herself" .

Harper's BAZAAR .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2021 . Retrieved April 28, 2021 .

^ "Stars Speak Against War At Oscars" .

CBS .

Archived from the original on July 31, 2023 . Retrieved July 31, 2023 .

^ "Stars split over Moore's speech" .

Chicago Tribune .

Archived from the original on July 31, 2023 . Retrieved July 31, 2023 .

^ "Trump seems to love humiliating people -Scorsese in Taormina" .

Agenzia Nazionale Stampa Associata . June 12, 2025 . Retrieved June 14, 2025 .

^ a b Cho, Winston (March 22, 2024).

"Martin Scorsese Settles Lawsuit Over Claims He Reneged on Deal to Produce World War II Movie" .

The Hollywood Reporter . Retrieved August 1, 2024 .

^ a b Maddaus, Gene (March 22, 2024).

"Martin Scorsese Settles Lawsuit With Screenwriter Who Accused Him of Taking $500,000 to Do Nothing" .

Variety . Retrieved August 1, 2024 .

^ After Image: The Incredible Catholic Imagination of Six Catholic American Filmmakers, Robert A. Blake, Loyola Press, 2000, p. 25 ^ Cruickshank, Douglas.

"Martin Scorsese: Teaching Visual Literacy" Archived April 7, 2020, at the Wayback Machine , edutopia.org, October 19, 2006, accessed November 3, 2014 ^ Pond, Steve.

"Save the Day" Archived April 7, 2020, at the Wayback Machine , DGA Quarterly , Directors Guild of America, Spring 2007, accessed November 12, 2014 ^ Mike Fleming, Mike Jr.

"Christopher Nolan Joins Film Foundation Board" Archived December 12, 2019, at the Wayback Machine , Deadline , April 22, 2015, accessed May 31, 2018 ^ "Board of Directors" .

filmfoundation.org .

Archived from the original on June 28, 2021 . Retrieved March 16, 2021 .

^ Turan, Kenneth (May 17, 2009).

" 'The Red Shoes' shines anew" .

Los Angeles Times . Los Angeles, California.

Archived from the original on October 14, 2018.

^ "Martin Scorsese Selected for Robert Osborne Award at TCM Festival" .

Variety . March 2018.

Archived from the original on April 7, 2020 . Retrieved April 7, 2020 .

^ Helm, Douglas (April 23, 2024).

"Seth MacFarlane Teams With Martin Scorsese To Save Classic Cartoons" .

GIANT FREAKIN ROBOT . Retrieved May 4, 2024 .

^ Mendez, Gabriella (April 18, 2024).

"Seth MacFarlane and Martin Scorsese Team Up for Animation Restoration Project" .

CBR . Retrieved May 4, 2024 .

^ "World Cinema Project" .

filmfoundation.org .

Archived from the original on November 11, 2019 . Retrieved April 7, 2020 .

^ "Martin Scorsese's World Cinema Project" .

Criterion Collection .

Archived from the original on February 11, 2020 . Retrieved April 7, 2020 .

^ "Martin Scorsese's World Cinema Project" .

The Criterion Collection .

Archived from the original on February 11, 2020 . Retrieved April 7, 2020 .

^ "Martin Scorsese's World Cinema Project No. 2" .

The Criterion Collection .

Archived from the original on October 20, 2019 . Retrieved April 7, 2020 .

^ "Martin Scorsese leads effort to save lost African cinema" .

CNN . November 10, 2017.

Archived from the original on February 29, 2020 . Retrieved April 7, 2020 .

^ a b "MARTIN SCORSESE ON THE AFRICAN FILM HERITAGE PROJECT" .

The Film Foundation .

Archived from the original on January 15, 2020 . Retrieved April 7, 2020 .

^ "Martin Scorsese and the African Film Heritage Project Are Bringing Four Vital Films Home" .

IndieWire . February 23, 2019.

Archived from the original on January 18, 2020 . Retrieved April 7, 2020 .

^ Maher, Kevin.

"Martin Scorsese mentored by masters" .

London Times .

Archived from the original on December 27, 2020 . Retrieved November 14, 2020 .

^ "Scorsese by Ebert: Introduction" .

Rogerebert.com . December 14, 2012.

Archived from the original on September 22, 2020 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ "Martin Scorsese – IMDb" .

IMDb .

Archived from the original on November 13, 2020 . Retrieved November 14, 2020 .

^ "Scorsese Mentoring Argentinean Director Celina Murga" .

ComingSoon.com . November 29, 2010.

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 14, 2020 .

^ Hirschberg, Lynn (November 16, 1997).

"The Two Hollywoods: The Directors; Woody Allen; Martin Scorsese" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 29, 2017 . Retrieved November 16, 2020 .

^ "Scorsese Champions Ari Aster Movies: 'So Disturbing' They're 'Deeply Uncomfortable' " .

IndieWire . July 6, 2020.

Archived from the original on December 27, 2020 . Retrieved November 14, 2020 .

^ "Scorsese Wrote Bong Joon Ho a Heartfelt Letter After Oscars: 'You've Done Well, Now Rest' " .

IndieWire . February 20, 2020.

Archived from the original on February 21, 2020 . Retrieved November 14, 2020 .

^ Scorsese, Martin (November 5, 2019).

"Martin Scorsese: I Said Marvel Movies Aren't Cinema. Let Me Explain" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 14, 2020 .

^ "Martin Scorsese Expands on Marvel Movies Comments: 'Theme Park Films' Are 'a New Art Form' " .

The Wrap . October 26, 2019.

Archived from the original on August 5, 2020 . Retrieved November 14, 2020 .

^ "Martin Scorsese: There's always the budget, but I am more concerned about the creative freedom" . Filmtalk. October 26, 2015.

Archived from the original on October 25, 2016 . Retrieved February 13, 2016 .

^ Wilson 2011 , p. 111.

^ Wilson 2011 , p. 72.

^ "Martin Scorsese's Picks for 2012 Sight and Sound Polls" .

Bfi.org.uk .

British Film Institute . Archived from the original on February 23, 2016 . Retrieved August 22, 2012 .

^ "Martin Scorsese and Bong Joon Ho's 2022 Lists of the Greatest Films of All-Time" . December 2, 2022.

Archived from the original on December 7, 2022 . Retrieved December 7, 2022 .

^ "Ebert & Scorsese: Best Films of the 1990s" .

Rogerebert.com . December 19, 2012.

Archived from the original on August 28, 2018 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ "Ebert & Scorsese: Best Films of the 1990S" .

Siskel and Ebert Movie Reviews .

Archived from the original on October 23, 2020 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ Bell, Crystal (March 27, 2012).

"Martin Scorsese Foreign Film List: Director Recommends 39 Films To Young Filmmaker Colin Levy" .

Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on January 15, 2021 . Retrieved January 14, 2021 .

^ Vincentelli, Elisabeth (July 29, 2020).

"The World's Greatest Directors Have Their Own Streaming Lists" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved June 3, 2024 .

^ "Martin Scorsese's list" .

LaCinetek . Retrieved June 3, 2024 .

^ "Letter by Martin Scorsese to Cédric Klapisch and LaCinetek" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on March 3, 2022.

^ "Golden Plate Awardees of the American Academy of Achievement" .

www.achievement.org .

American Academy of Achievement .

Archived from the original on December 15, 2016 . Retrieved September 18, 2020 .

^ AFI's 100 Greatest American Films of All Time Archived January 9, 2014, at the Wayback Machine American Film Institute. Retrieved February 26, 2017.

^ Wilson 2011 , p. 50.

^ "Complete List – The 2007 TIME 100" .

Time . January 13, 2014.

Archived from the original on December 11, 2013 . Retrieved January 24, 2014 .

^ "Greatest Directors Ever – Part 2" . Total Film. March 5, 2010.

Archived from the original on April 10, 2014 . Retrieved January 24, 2014 .

^ "Wesleyan University: The Wesleyan Cinema Archives" . Wesleyan.edu.

Archived from the original on April 25, 2010 . Retrieved April 11, 2010 .

^ "Movies: 10 All-Time Greatest – 7. Mean Streets (1973)" .

Entertainment Weekly . June 27, 2013.

Archived from the original on February 11, 2017 . Retrieved February 23, 2017 .

^ "Scorsese 'comes home' to Poland – Thenews.pl :: News from Poland" . Thenews.pl.

Archived from the original on April 6, 2012 . Retrieved January 5, 2012 .

^ "Outstanding Directing For Nonfiction Programming 2012" .

emmys.com . September 16, 2012. Archived from the original on September 7, 2012 . Retrieved September 16, 2012 .

^ Itzkoff, Dave (February 19, 2013).

"He's Talking to You: Scorsese to Give Jefferson Lecture for National Endowment for the Humanities" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on February 22, 2014 . Retrieved September 1, 2019 .

^ "Scorsese Talks 'The Language Of Cinema'" Archived February 17, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , NPR , May 7, 2013.

^ "MKiDN – Medal Zasłużony Kulturze – Gloria Artis" .

www.mkidn.gov.pl (in Polish).

Archived from the original on November 1, 2017 . Retrieved October 21, 2017 .

^ "Polish Consulate NYC post" .

x.com . Retrieved May 30, 2025 .

^ "EuroScreenwriters – Interviews with European Film Directors – Ingmar Bergman" . Archived from the original on August 26, 2016 . Retrieved March 5, 2017 .

^ Capra, Frank; Poague, Leland A (March 2004).

Frank Capra: interviews . Univ. Press of Mississippi.

ISBN 978-1-57806-617-9 .

Archived from the original on May 6, 2016 . Retrieved January 12, 2016 .

^ Godard, Jean Luc; Sterritt, David (1998).

Jean-Luc Godard: interviews . Univ. Press of Mississippi.

ISBN 978-1-57806-081-8 .

Archived from the original on December 27, 2020 . Retrieved February 27, 2016 .

^ "Werner Herzog Interview – UGO.com" . Archived from the original on February 2, 2010.

^ "Programa de Educação Tutorial da Faculdade de Economia da UFF" . Archived from the original on July 18, 2010 . Retrieved September 1, 2010 .

^ Kurosawa, Akira; Cardullo, Bert (2008).

Akira Kurosawa: interviews . Univ. Press of Mississippi.

ISBN 978-1-57806-997-2 .

Archived from the original on December 27, 2020 . Retrieved February 27, 2016 .

^ Organ, Steven (2009).

David Lean:interviews .

Univ. Press of Mississippi . pp. 110, 154.

ISBN 978-1-60473-235-1 . Retrieved September 1, 2010 .

^ Lazar, David (April 2003).

Michael Powell: interviews . Univ. Press of Mississippi.

ISBN 978-1-57806-498-4 .

^ Ray, Satyajit; Cardullo, Bert (January 2007).

Satyajit Ray: interviews . Univ. Press of Mississippi.

ISBN 978-1-57806-937-8 .

Archived from the original on December 27, 2020 . Retrieved October 3, 2020 .

^ Truffaut, François; Bergan, Ronald (January 2008).

François Truffaut: interviews . Univ. Press of Mississippi.

ISBN 978-1-934110-14-0 .

Scorsese.

^ "APS Member History" .

search.amphilsoc.org .

Archived from the original on October 30, 2020 . Retrieved May 3, 2021 .

^ "Martin Scorsese and Mary Beard receive Oxford degrees" . BBC News Online. June 20, 2018.

Archived from the original on June 22, 2018 . Retrieved June 27, 2018 .

^ "Complete National Film Registry Listing" .

Library of Congress .

Archived from the original on May 7, 2016 . Retrieved February 29, 2020 .

^ Guillermo del Toro. "Del Toro Pens Seeping Tribute". December 18, 2019.

Variety magazine.

[3] Archived December 27, 2019, at the Wayback Machine ^ Grobar, Matt (January 5, 2020).

"Sam Mendes Surprises With Golden Globe Win For Best Director, Saluting Martin Scorsese & Grandfather Who Inspired His World War I Drama '1917" .

Deadline . Archived from the original on January 6, 2020.

^ " 'Parasite's Bong Joon Ho Praises Martin Scorsese, Quentin Tarantino Upon Accepting Oscar For Best Director" . Deadline. February 9, 2020.

Archived from the original on February 10, 2020 . Retrieved February 10, 2020 .

^ "NYU Tisch School of the Arts Receives Major Gift to Establish the Martin Scorsese Institute of Global Cinematic Arts" .

NYU Web . Retrieved February 4, 2024 .

Works cited [ edit ] Wilson, Michael (2011).

Scorsese On Scorsese .

Cahiers du Cinéma .

ISBN 9782866427023 .

External links [ edit ] Martin Scorsese at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Martin Scorsese at IMDb Appearances on C-SPAN Martin Scorsese on Instagram Martin Scorsese on Facebook Martin Scorsese on Letterboxd Martin Scorsese at Rotten Tomatoes Martin Scorsese at the TCM Movie Database Martin Scorsese at the American Film Institute Catalog v t e Martin Scorsese Awards and nominations Filmography Bibliography Unrealized projects Narrative feature films Who's That Knocking at My Door (1967) Boxcar Bertha (1972) Mean Streets (1973) Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore (1974) Taxi Driver (1976) New York, New York (1977) Raging Bull (1980) The King of Comedy (1982) After Hours (1985) The Color of Money (1986) The Last Temptation of Christ (1988) Goodfellas (1990) Cape Fear (1991) The Age of Innocence (1993) Casino (1995) Kundun (1997) Bringing Out the Dead (1999) Gangs of New York (2002) The Aviator (2004) The Departed (2006) Shutter Island (2010) Hugo (2011) The Wolf of Wall Street (2013) Silence (2016) The Irishman (2019) Killers of the Flower Moon (2023) Short films What's a Nice Girl like You Doing in a Place like This?

(1963) It's Not Just You, Murray!

(1964) The Big Shave (1967) " Bad " (1987) New York Stories (segment "Life Lessons", 1989) Made in Milan (1990) The Key to Reserva (2007) The Audition (2015) Produced only The Grifters (1990) Mad Dog and Glory (1993) Clockers (1995) The Hi-Lo Country (1998) The Young Victoria (2009) Maestro (2023) Die My Love (2025) Television " Boardwalk Empire " (2010) Vinyl (2016) Pretend It's a City (2021) Martin Scorsese Presents: The Saints (2024) An Afternoon with SCTV (TBA) Documentaries Street Scenes 1970 (1970) Italianamerican (1974) American Boy: A Profile of Steven Prince (1978) The Last Waltz (1978) A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies (1995) My Voyage to Italy (1999) The Blues: Feel Like Going Home (2003) No Direction Home (2005) Shine a Light (2008) A Letter to Elia (2010) Public Speaking (2010) George Harrison: Living in the Material World (2011) The 50 Year Argument (2014) Rolling Thunder Revue: A Bob Dylan Story by Martin Scorsese (2019) Related Collaborations Robert De Niro Leonardo DiCaprio " Scorsese Baby Daddy " Sikelia Productions Goncharov Awards for Martin Scorsese v t e Academy Award for Best Director 1927–1975 Frank Borzage (1927/28; Dramatic Picture) Lewis Milestone (1927/28; Comedy Picture) Frank Lloyd (1928/29) Lewis Milestone (1929/30) Norman Taurog (1930/31) Frank Borzage (1931/32) Frank Lloyd (1932/33) Frank Capra (1934) John Ford (1935) Frank Capra (1936) Leo McCarey (1937) Frank Capra (1938) Victor Fleming (1939) John Ford (1940) John Ford (1941) William Wyler (1942) Michael Curtiz (1943) Leo McCarey (1944) Billy Wilder (1945) William Wyler (1946) Elia Kazan (1947) John Huston (1948) Joseph L. Mankiewicz (1949) Joseph L. Mankiewicz (1950) George Stevens (1951) John Ford (1952) Fred Zinnemann (1953) Elia Kazan (1954) Delbert Mann (1955) George Stevens (1956) David Lean (1957) Vincente Minnelli (1958) William Wyler (1959) Billy Wilder (1960) Jerome Robbins and Robert Wise (1961) David Lean (1962) Tony Richardson (1963) George Cukor (1964) Robert Wise (1965) Fred Zinnemann (1966) Mike Nichols (1967) Carol Reed (1968) John Schlesinger (1969) Franklin J. Schaffner (1970) William Friedkin (1971) Bob Fosse (1972) George Roy Hill (1973) Francis Ford Coppola (1974) Miloš Forman (1975) 1976–present John G. Avildsen (1976) Woody Allen (1977) Michael Cimino (1978) Robert Benton (1979) Robert Redford (1980) Warren Beatty (1981) Richard Attenborough (1982) James L. Brooks (1983) Miloš Forman (1984) Sydney Pollack (1985) Oliver Stone (1986) Bernardo Bertolucci (1987) Barry Levinson (1988) Oliver Stone (1989) Kevin Costner (1990) Jonathan Demme (1991) Clint Eastwood (1992) Steven Spielberg (1993) Robert Zemeckis (1994) Mel Gibson (1995) Anthony Minghella (1996) James Cameron (1997) Steven Spielberg (1998) Sam Mendes (1999) Steven Soderbergh (2000) Ron Howard (2001) Roman Polanski (2002) Peter Jackson (2003) Clint Eastwood (2004) Ang Lee (2005) Martin Scorsese (2006) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007) Danny Boyle (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) Tom Hooper (2010) Michel Hazanavicius (2011) Ang Lee (2012) Alfonso Cuarón (2013) Alejandro González Iñárritu (2014) Alejandro González Iñárritu (2015) Damien Chazelle (2016) Guillermo del Toro (2017) Alfonso Cuarón (2018) Bong Joon-ho (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020/21) Jane Campion (2021) Daniel Kwan and Daniel Scheinert (2022) Christopher Nolan (2023) Sean Baker (2024) v t e AARP Movies for Grownups Award for Best Director Robert Altman (2001) Roman Polanski (2002) Joel Schumacher (2003) Mike Nichols (2004) Steven Spielberg (2005) Clint Eastwood (2006) Tony Gilroy (2007) Gus Van Sant (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) Danny Boyle (2010) Stephen Daldry (2011) Steven Spielberg (2012) Alfonso Cuarón (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) Ridley Scott (2015) Kenneth Lonergan (2016) Guillermo del Toro (2017) Spike Lee (2018) Martin Scorsese (2019) Aaron Sorkin (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Baz Luhrmann (2022) Christopher Nolan (2023) Jacques Audiard (2024) v t e AFI Life Achievement Award John Ford (1973) James Cagney (1974) Orson Welles (1975) William Wyler (1976) Bette Davis (1977) Henry Fonda (1978) Alfred Hitchcock (1979) James Stewart (1980) Fred Astaire (1981) Frank Capra (1982) John Huston (1983) Lillian Gish (1984) Gene Kelly (1985) Billy Wilder (1986) Barbara Stanwyck (1987) Jack Lemmon (1988) Gregory Peck (1989) David Lean (1990) Kirk Douglas (1991) Sidney Poitier (1992) Elizabeth Taylor (1993) Jack Nicholson (1994) Steven Spielberg (1995) Clint Eastwood (1996) Martin Scorsese (1997) Robert Wise (1998) Dustin Hoffman (1999) Harrison Ford (2000) Barbra Streisand (2001) Tom Hanks (2002) Robert De Niro (2003) Meryl Streep (2004) George Lucas (2005) Sean Connery (2006) Al Pacino (2007) Warren Beatty (2008) Michael Douglas (2009) Mike Nichols (2010) Morgan Freeman (2011) Shirley MacLaine (2012) Mel Brooks (2013) Jane Fonda (2014) Steve Martin (2015) John Williams (2016) Diane Keaton (2017) George Clooney (2018) Denzel Washington (2019) Julie Andrews (2022) Nicole Kidman (2024) Francis Ford Coppola (2025) v t e American Riviera Award Award Diane Lane (2004) Kevin Bacon (2005) Philip Seymour Hoffman (2006) Forest Whitaker (2007) Tommy Lee Jones (2008) Mickey Rourke (2009) Sandra Bullock (2010) Annette Bening (2011) Martin Scorsese (2012) Quentin Tarantino (2013) Robert Redford (2014) Patricia Arquette and Ethan Hawke (2015) Michael Keaton , Rachel McAdams and Mark Ruffalo (2016) Jeff Bridges (2017) Sam Rockwell (2018) Viggo Mortensen (2019) Renée Zellweger (2020) Delroy Lindo (2021) Kristen Stewart (2022) Brendan Fraser (2023) Mark Ruffalo (2024) Zoe Saldaña (2025) Festival editions 2024 2025 v t e BAFTA Award for Best Film 1940s The Best Years of Our Lives (1947) Hamlet (1948) Bicycle Thieves (1949) 1950s All About Eve (1950) La Ronde (1951) The Sound Barrier (1952) Forbidden Games (1953) The Wages of Fear (1954) Richard III (1955) Gervaise (1956) The Bridge on the River Kwai (1957) Room at the Top (1958) Ben-Hur (1959) 1960s The Apartment – Billy Wilder (1960) Ballad of a Soldier – Grigori Chukhrai / The Hustler – Robert Rossen (1961) Lawrence of Arabia (1962) Tom Jones (1963) Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb (1964) My Fair Lady (1965) Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?

– Mike Nichols (1966) A Man for All Seasons – Fred Zinnemann (1967) The Graduate – Mike Nichols (1968) Midnight Cowboy – John Schlesinger (1969) 1970s Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid (1970) Sunday Bloody Sunday (1971) Cabaret (1972) Day for Night (1973) Lacombe, Lucien (1974) Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore (1975) One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1976) Annie Hall – Charles H. Joffe and Jack Rollins (1977) Julia – Richard Roth (1978) Manhattan (1979) 1980s The Elephant Man – David Lynch (1980) Chariots of Fire – David Puttnam (1981) Gandhi – Richard Attenborough (1982) Educating Rita – Lewis Gilbert (1983) The Killing Fields – David Puttnam (1984) The Purple Rose of Cairo – Woody Allen and Robert Greenhut (1985) A Room with a View – James Ivory and Ismail Merchant (1986) Jean de Florette – Claude Berri (1987) The Last Emperor – Bernardo Bertolucci and Jeremy Thomas (1988) Dead Poets Society – Peter Weir , Steven Haft , Paul Junger Witt , and Tony Thomas (1989) 1990s Goodfellas – Martin Scorsese , Robert Chartoff , and Irwin Winkler (1990) The Commitments – Alan Parker , Lynda Myles , and Roger Randall-Cutler (1991) Howards End – James Ivory and Ismail Merchant (1992) Schindler's List – Steven Spielberg , Branko Lustig , and Gerald R. Molen (1993) Four Weddings and a Funeral – Mike Newell and Duncan Kenworthy (1994) Sense and Sensibility – Ang Lee and Lindsay Doran (1995) The English Patient – Anthony Minghella and Saul Zaentz (1996) The Full Monty – Peter Cattaneo and Uberto Pasolini (1997) Shakespeare in Love – Donna Gigliotti , Marc Norman , David Parfitt , Harvey Weinstein , and Edward Zwick (1998) American Beauty – Bruce Cohen and Dan Jinks (1999) 2000s Gladiator – David Franzoni , Branko Lustig , and Douglas Wick (2000) The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring – Peter Jackson , Barrie M. Osborne , Tim Sanders , and Fran Walsh (2001) The Pianist – Robert Benmussa, Roman Polanski , and Alain Sarde (2002) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King – Peter Jackson , Barrie M. Osborne , and Fran Walsh (2003) The Aviator – Sandy Climan , Charles Evans Jr.

, Graham King , and Michael Mann (2004) Brokeback Mountain – Diana Ossana and James Schamus (2005) The Queen – Andy Harries , Christine Langan , and Tracey Seaward (2006) Atonement – Tim Bevan , Eric Fellner , and Paul Webster (2007) Slumdog Millionaire – Christian Colson (2008) The Hurt Locker – Kathryn Bigelow , Mark Boal , Nicolas Chartier , and Greg Shapiro (2009) 2010s The King's Speech – Iain Canning , Emile Sherman , and Gareth Unwin (2010) The Artist – Thomas Langmann (2011) Argo – Ben Affleck , George Clooney , and Grant Heslov (2012) 12 Years a Slave – Dede Gardner , Anthony Katagas , Jeremy Kleiner , Steve McQueen , and Brad Pitt (2013) Boyhood – Richard Linklater and Cathleen Sutherland (2014) The Revenant – Steve Golin , Alejandro G. Iñárritu , Arnon Milchan , Mary Parent , and Keith Redmon (2015) La La Land – Fred Berger , Jordan Horowitz , and Marc Platt (2016) Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri – Graham Broadbent , Peter Czernin , and Martin McDonagh (2017) Roma – Nicolás Celis , Alfonso Cuarón , and Gabriela Rodríguez (2018) 1917 – Pippa Harris , Callum McDougall, Sam Mendes , and Jayne-Ann Tenggren (2019) 2020s Nomadland – Mollye Asher, Dan Janvey, Frances McDormand , Peter Spears , and Chloé Zhao (2020) The Power of the Dog – Jane Campion , Iain Canning , Roger Frappier , Tanya Seghatchian , and Emile Sherman (2021) All Quiet on the Western Front – Malte Grunert (2022) Oppenheimer – Christopher Nolan , Charles Roven , and Emma Thomas (2023) Conclave – Tessa Ross , Juliette Howell , and Michael A. Jackman (2024) v t e BAFTA Award for Best Direction 1968–2000 Mike Nichols (1968) John Schlesinger (1969) George Roy Hill (1970) John Schlesinger (1971) Bob Fosse (1972) François Truffaut (1973) Roman Polanski (1974) Stanley Kubrick (1975) Miloš Forman (1976) Woody Allen (1977) Alan Parker (1978) Francis Ford Coppola (1979) Akira Kurosawa (1980) Louis Malle (1981) Richard Attenborough (1982) Bill Forsyth (1983) Wim Wenders (1984) No Award (1985) Woody Allen (1986) Oliver Stone (1987) Louis Malle (1988) Kenneth Branagh (1989) Martin Scorsese (1990) Alan Parker (1991) Robert Altman (1992) Steven Spielberg (1993) Mike Newell (1994) Michael Radford (1995) Joel Coen (1996) Baz Luhrmann (1997) Peter Weir (1998) Pedro Almodóvar (1999) Ang Lee (2000) 2001–present Peter Jackson (2001) Roman Polanski (2002) Peter Weir (2003) Mike Leigh (2004) Ang Lee (2005) Paul Greengrass (2006) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007) Danny Boyle (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) David Fincher (2010) Michel Hazanavicius (2011) Ben Affleck (2012) Alfonso Cuarón (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) Alejandro G. Iñárritu (2015) Damien Chazelle (2016) Guillermo del Toro (2017) Alfonso Cuarón (2018) Sam Mendes (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Edward Berger (2022) Christopher Nolan (2023) Brady Corbet (2024) v t e BAFTA Award for Best Adapted Screenplay 1983–2000 Ruth Prawer Jhabvala (1983) Bruce Robinson (1984) Richard Condon and Janet Roach (1985) Kurt Luedtke (1986) Claude Berri and Gérard Brach (1987) Jean-Claude Carrière and Philip Kaufman (1988) Christopher Hampton (1989) Nicholas Pileggi and Martin Scorsese (1990) Dick Clement , Roddy Doyle , and Ian La Frenais (1991) Michael Tolkin (1992) Steven Zaillian (1993) Paul Attanasio (1994) John Hodge (1995) Anthony Minghella (1996) Baz Luhrmann and Craig Pearce (1997) Elaine May (1998) Neil Jordan (1999) Stephen Gaghan (2000) 2001–present Ted Elliott , Terry Rossio , Roger S. H. Schulman , and Joe Stillman (2001) Charlie Kaufman and Donald Kaufman (2002) Philippa Boyens , Peter Jackson , and Fran Walsh (2003) Alexander Payne and Jim Taylor (2004) Larry McMurtry and Diana Ossana (2005) Jeremy Brock and Peter Morgan (2006) Ronald Harwood (2007) Simon Beaufoy (2008) Jason Reitman and Sheldon Turner (2009) Aaron Sorkin (2010) Bridget O'Connor and Peter Straughan (2011) David O. Russell (2012) Steve Coogan and Jeff Pope (2013) Anthony McCarten (2014) Adam McKay and Charles Randolph (2015) Luke Davies (2016) James Ivory (2017) Spike Lee , David Rabinowitz, Charlie Wachtel, and Kevin Willmott (2018) Taika Waititi (2019) Christopher Hampton and Florian Zeller (2020) Sian Heder (2021) Edward Berger , Lesley Paterson , and Ian Stokell (2022) Cord Jefferson (2023) Peter Straughan (2024) v t e BAFTA Fellowship 1971–2000 Alfred Hitchcock (1971) Freddie Young (1972) Grace Wyndham Goldie (1973) David Lean (1974) Jacques Cousteau (1975) Charlie Chaplin (1976) Laurence Olivier (1976) Denis Forman (1977) Fred Zinnemann (1978) Lew Grade (1979) Huw Wheldon (1979) David Attenborough (1980) John Huston (1980) Abel Gance (1981) Michael Powell & Emeric Pressburger (1981) Andrzej Wajda (1982) Richard Attenborough (1983) Hugh Greene (1984) Sam Spiegel (1984) Jeremy Isaacs (1985) Steven Spielberg (1986) Federico Fellini (1987) Ingmar Bergman (1988) Alec Guinness (1989) Paul Fox (1990) Louis Malle (1991) John Gielgud (1992) David Plowright (1992) Sydney Samuelson (1993) Colin Young (1993) Michael Grade (1994) Billy Wilder (1995) Jeanne Moreau (1996) Ronald Neame (1996) John Schlesinger (1996) Maggie Smith (1996) Woody Allen (1997) Steven Bochco (1997) Julie Christie (1997) Oswald Morris (1997) Harold Pinter (1997) David Rose (1997) Sean Connery (1998) Bill Cotton (1998) Eric Morecambe & Ernie Wise (1999) Elizabeth Taylor (1999) Michael Caine (2000) Stanley Kubrick (2000) Peter Bazalgette (2000) 2001–present Albert Finney (2001) John Thaw (2001) Judi Dench (2001) Warren Beatty (2002) Merchant Ivory Productions (2002) Andrew Davies (2002) John Mills (2002) Saul Zaentz (2003) David Jason (2003) John Boorman (2004) Roger Graef (2004) John Barry (2005) David Frost (2005) David Puttnam (2006) Ken Loach (2006) Anne V. Coates (2007) Richard Curtis (2007) Will Wright (2007) Anthony Hopkins (2008) Bruce Forsyth (2008) Dawn French & Jennifer Saunders (2009) Terry Gilliam (2009) Nolan Bushnell (2009) Vanessa Redgrave (2010) Shigeru Miyamoto (2010) Melvyn Bragg (2010) Christopher Lee (2011) Peter Molyneux (2011) Trevor McDonald (2011) Martin Scorsese (2012) Rolf Harris (2012) Alan Parker (2013) Gabe Newell (2013) Michael Palin (2013) Helen Mirren (2014) Rockstar Games (2014) Julie Walters (2014) Mike Leigh (2015) David Braben (2015) Jon Snow (2015) Sidney Poitier (2016) John Carmack (2016) Ray Galton & Alan Simpson (2016) Mel Brooks (2017) Joanna Lumley (2017) Ridley Scott (2018) Tim Schafer (2018) Kate Adie (2018) Thelma Schoonmaker (2019) Joan Bakewell (2019) Kathleen Kennedy (2020) Hideo Kojima (2020) Ang Lee (2021) Siobhan Reddy (2021) Billy Connolly (2022) Sandy Powell (2023) Shuhei Yoshida (2023) Meera Syal (2023) Samantha Morton (2024) Floella Benjamin (2024) Warwick Davis (2025) Yoko Shimomura (2025) Kirsty Wark (2025) v t e BFI Fellowship recipients Marcel Carné / David Lean / Michael Powell / Emeric Pressburger / Satyajit Ray / Orson Welles (1983) Sidney Bernstein (1984) John Brabourne / Laurence Olivier (1985) Jeremy Isaacs / Deborah Kerr / Akira Kurosawa / Dilys Powell (1986) Dirk Bogarde / Bette Davis / Elem Klimov (1987) Graham Greene / Vanessa Redgrave / Anthony Smith (1988) Peggy Ashcroft / Gérard Depardieu / David Francis (1989) Derek Jarman / Krzysztof Kieślowski / Jeanne Moreau / Fred Zinnemann (1990) Alec Guinness / Leslie Hardcastle (1991) Richard Attenborough / Maggie Smith (1992) Clint Eastwood / Denis Forman / Maureen O'Hara (1993) Nicolas Roeg / Jean Simmons (1994) Michelangelo Antonioni / John Mills / Martin Scorsese / Robert Wise (1995) Michael Caine / Ken Loach (1996) Michael Parkinson / Lynda La Plante / Verity Lambert / David Puttnam / Sydney Samuelson / Thelma Schoonmaker / Alan Yentob (1997) Bernardo Bertolucci / Jeremy Thomas (1998) John Paul Getty Jr.

(1999) Elizabeth Taylor (2000) Robert Altman / Lewis Gilbert (2001) Jack Cardiff / Bob Weinstein (2002) Abbas Kiarostami / Mike Leigh / Ousmane Sembène (2005) Terence Davies (2007) Souleymane Cissé / John Hurt / Ridley Scott (2009) Danny Boyle / David Rose (2010) Isabelle Huppert / Judi Dench / Ralph Fiennes / David Cronenberg (2011) Bryan Forbes / Helena Bonham Carter / Tim Burton / Richard Lester (2012) Philip French / Christopher Lee / John Boorman (2013) Al Pacino / Stephen Frears (2014) Mel Brooks / Cate Blanchett (2015) Hugh Grant / Greg Dyke / Steve McQueen (2016) Peter Morgan / Paul Greengrass (2017) Olivia Colman (2019) Amanda Nevill / Tilda Swinton (2020) Michael G. Wilson / Barbara Broccoli (2022) Spike Lee (2023) v t e Boston Society of Film Critics Award for Best Director Roman Polanski (1980) Steven Spielberg (1981) Steven Spielberg (1982) Paolo Taviani and Vittorio Taviani (1983) Bertrand Tavernier (1984) John Huston (1985) David Lynch / Oliver Stone (1986) Stanley Kubrick (1987) Stephen Frears (1988) Woody Allen (1989) Martin Scorsese (1990) Jonathan Demme (1991) Robert Altman (1992) Steven Spielberg (1993) Quentin Tarantino (1994) Ang Lee (1995) Mike Leigh (1996) Curtis Hanson (1997) John Boorman (1998) David O. Russell (1999) Cameron Crowe (2000) David Lynch (2001) Roman Polanski (2002) Sofia Coppola (2003) Zhang Yimou (2004) Ang Lee (2005) Martin Scorsese (2006) Julian Schnabel (2007) Gus Van Sant (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) David Fincher (2010) Martin Scorsese (2011) Kathryn Bigelow (2012) Steve McQueen (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) Todd Haynes (2015) Damien Chazelle (2016) Paul Thomas Anderson (2017) Lynne Ramsay (2018) Bong Joon-ho (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Ryusuke Hamaguchi (2021) Todd Field (2022) Jonathan Glazer (2023) Sean Baker (2024) v t e Britannia Awards Excellence in Film Albert R. Broccoli (1989) Michael Caine (1990) Peter Ustinov (1992) Martin Scorsese (1993) Anthony Hopkins (1995) Bob Weinstein and Harvey Weinstein (1996) Dustin Hoffman (1997) John Travolta (1998) Stanley Kubrick (1999) Steven Spielberg (2000) George Lucas (2002) Hugh Grant (2003) Tom Hanks (2004) Tom Cruise (2005) Clint Eastwood (2006) Denzel Washington (2007) Sean Penn (2008) Robert De Niro (2009) Jeff Bridges (2010) Warren Beatty (2011) Daniel Day-Lewis (2012) George Clooney (2013) Robert Downey Jr.

(2014) Meryl Streep (2015) Jodie Foster (2016) Matt Damon (2017) Cate Blanchett (2018) Jane Fonda (2019) Excellence in Directing Peter Weir (2003) Jim Sheridan (2004) Mike Newell (2005) Anthony Minghella (2006) Martin Campbell (2007) Stephen Frears (2008) Danny Boyle (2009) Christopher Nolan (2010) David Yates (2011) Quentin Tarantino (2012) Kathryn Bigelow (2013) Mike Leigh (2014) Sam Mendes (2015) Ang Lee (2016) Ava DuVernay (2017) Steve McQueen (2018) Jordan Peele (2019) Worldwide Contribution to Entertainment Howard Stringer (2003) Kirk Douglas (2009) Ridley Scott & Tony Scott (2010) John Lasseter (2011) Will Wright (2012) Ben Kingsley (2013) Judi Dench (2014) Harrison Ford (2015) Samuel L. Jackson (2016) Kenneth Branagh (2017) Kevin Feige (2018) Jackie Chan (2019) British Artist of the Year Rachel Weisz (2006) Kate Winslet (2007) Tilda Swinton (2008) Emily Blunt (2009) Michael Sheen (2010) Helena Bonham Carter (2011) Daniel Craig (2012) Benedict Cumberbatch (2013) Emma Watson (2014) James Corden (2015) Felicity Jones (2016) Claire Foy (2017) Emilia Clarke (2018) Phoebe Waller-Bridge (2019) Excellence in Comedy Betty White (2010) Ben Stiller (2011) Trey Parker and Matt Stone (2012) Sacha Baron Cohen (2013) Julia Louis-Dreyfus (2014) Amy Schumer (2015) Ricky Gervais (2016) Aziz Ansari (2017) Jim Carrey (2018) Steve Coogan (2019) Excellence in Television Aaron Spelling (1999) HBO Original Programming (2002) Dick Van Dyke (2017) Damian Lewis (2018) Norman Lear (2019) Humanitarian Award Richard Curtis (2007) Don Cheadle (2008) Colin Firth (2009) Idris Elba (2013) Mark Ruffalo (2014) Orlando Bloom (2015) Ewan McGregor (2016) Retired Awards BBC (1999) Tarsem Singh (1999) Angela Lansbury (2003) Helen Mirren (2004) Elizabeth Taylor (2005) Ronald Neame (2005) Sidney Poitier (2006) Bob Shaye and Michael Lynne (2007) v t e Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Director 1946–1975 René Clément (1946) René Clément (1949) Luis Buñuel (1951) Christian-Jaque (1952) Jules Dassin / Sergei Vasilyev (1955) Sergei Yutkevich (1956) Robert Bresson (1957) Ingmar Bergman (1958) François Truffaut (1959) Yuliya Solntseva (1961) Liviu Ciulei (1965) Sergei Yutkevich (1966) Ferenc Kósa (1967) Vojtěch Jasný / Glauber Rocha (1969) John Boorman (1970) Miklós Jancsó (1972) Michel Brault / Costa-Gavras (1975) 1976–2000 Ettore Scola (1976) Nagisa Ōshima (1978) Terrence Malick (1979) Werner Herzog (1982) Robert Bresson / Andrei Tarkovsky (1983) Bertrand Tavernier (1984) André Téchiné (1985) Martin Scorsese (1986) Wim Wenders (1987) Fernando Solanas (1988) Emir Kusturica (1989) Pavel Lungin (1990) Joel Coen (1991) Robert Altman (1992) Mike Leigh (1993) Nanni Moretti (1994) Mathieu Kassovitz (1995) Joel Coen (1996) Wong Kar-wai (1997) John Boorman (1998) Pedro Almodóvar (1999) Edward Yang (2000) 2001–present Joel Coen / David Lynch (2001) Paul Thomas Anderson / Im Kwon-taek (2002) Gus Van Sant (2003) Tony Gatlif (2004) Michael Haneke (2005) Alejandro González Iñárritu (2006) Julian Schnabel (2007) Nuri Bilge Ceylan (2008) Brillante Mendoza (2009) Mathieu Amalric (2010) Nicolas Winding Refn (2011) Carlos Reygadas (2012) Amat Escalante (2013) Bennett Miller (2014) Hou Hsiao-hsien (2015) Olivier Assayas / Cristian Mungiu (2016) Sofia Coppola (2017) Paweł Pawlikowski (2018) Dardenne brothers (2019) Leos Carax (2021) Park Chan-wook (2022) Tran Anh Hung (2023) Miguel Gomes (2024) Kleber Mendonça Filho (2025) v t e Cecil B. DeMille Award Cecil B. DeMille (1951) Walt Disney (1952) Darryl F. Zanuck (1953) Jean Hersholt (1954) Jack L. Warner (1955) Mervyn LeRoy (1956) Buddy Adler (1957) Maurice Chevalier (1958) Bing Crosby (1959) Fred Astaire (1960) Judy Garland (1961) Bob Hope (1962) Joseph E. Levine (1963) James Stewart (1964) John Wayne (1965) Charlton Heston (1966) Kirk Douglas (1967) Gregory Peck (1968) Joan Crawford (1969) Frank Sinatra (1970) Alfred Hitchcock (1971) Samuel Goldwyn (1972) Bette Davis (1973) Hal B. Wallis (1974) No Award (1975) Walter Mirisch (1976) Red Skelton (1977) Lucille Ball (1978) Henry Fonda (1979) Gene Kelly (1980) Sidney Poitier (1981) Laurence Olivier (1982) Paul Newman (1983) Elizabeth Taylor (1984) Barbara Stanwyck (1985) Anthony Quinn (1986) Clint Eastwood (1987) Doris Day (1988) Audrey Hepburn (1989) Jack Lemmon (1990) Robert Mitchum (1991) Lauren Bacall (1992) Robert Redford (1993) Sophia Loren (1994) Sean Connery (1995) Dustin Hoffman (1996) Shirley MacLaine (1997) Jack Nicholson (1998) Barbra Streisand (1999) Al Pacino (2000) Harrison Ford (2001) Gene Hackman (2002) Michael Douglas (2003) Robin Williams (2004) Anthony Hopkins (2005) Warren Beatty (2006) No Award (2007) Steven Spielberg (2008) Martin Scorsese (2009) Robert De Niro (2010) Morgan Freeman (2011) Jodie Foster (2012) Woody Allen (2013) George Clooney (2014) Denzel Washington (2015) Meryl Streep (2016) Oprah Winfrey (2017) Jeff Bridges (2018) Tom Hanks (2019) Jane Fonda (2020) No Award (2021) Eddie Murphy (2022) No Award (2023) Viola Davis (2024) v t e Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Director Robert Zemeckis (1988) Spike Lee (1989) Martin Scorsese (1990) Jonathan Demme (1991) Robert Altman (1992) Steven Spielberg (1993) Quentin Tarantino (1994) Oliver Stone (1995) Joel Coen (1996) Curtis Hanson (1997) Terrence Malick (1998) Sam Mendes (1999) Steven Soderbergh (2000) David Lynch (2001) Todd Haynes (2002) Peter Jackson (2003) Clint Eastwood (2004) David Cronenberg (2005) Martin Scorsese (2006) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007) Danny Boyle (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) David Fincher (2010) Terrence Malick (2011) Kathryn Bigelow (2012) Steve McQueen (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) George Miller (2015) Barry Jenkins (2016) Christopher Nolan (2017) Alfonso Cuarón (2018) Bong Joon-ho (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Daniel Kwan and Daniel Scheinert (2022) Christopher Nolan (2023) RaMell Ross (2024) v t e Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Screenplay Nicholas Pileggi and Martin Scorsese (1990) No Award (1991) No Award (1992) Steven Zaillian (1993) Roger Avary and Quentin Tarantino (1994) Christopher McQuarrie (1995) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (1996) Curtis Hanson and Brian Helgeland (1997) Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard (1998) Charlie Kaufman (1999) Cameron Crowe (2000) Christopher Nolan (2001) Charlie and Donald Kaufman (2002) Sofia Coppola (2003) Alexander Payne and Jim Taylor (2004) Paul Haggis and Bobby Moresco (2005) v t e Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Adapted Screenplay William Monahan (2006) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007) Simon Beaufoy (2008) Jason Reitman and Sheldon Turner (2009) Aaron Sorkin (2010) Steven Zaillian and Aaron Sorkin (2011) Tony Kushner (2012) John Ridley (2013) Gillian Flynn (2014) Adam McKay and Charles Randolph (2015) Seo-Kyung Chung and Park Chan-wook (2016) James Ivory (2017) Barry Jenkins (2018) Greta Gerwig (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Sarah Polley (2022) Eric Roth and Martin Scorsese (2023) RaMell Ross and Joslyn Barnes (2024) v t e Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Director Mel Gibson (1995) Anthony Minghella (1996) James Cameron (1997) Steven Spielberg (1998) Sam Mendes (1999) Steven Soderbergh (2000) Ron Howard / Baz Luhrmann (2001) Steven Spielberg (2002) Peter Jackson (2003) Martin Scorsese (2004) Ang Lee (2005) Martin Scorsese (2006) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007) Danny Boyle (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) David Fincher (2010) Michel Hazanavicius (2011) Ben Affleck (2012) Alfonso Cuarón (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) George Miller (2015) Damien Chazelle (2016) Guillermo del Toro (2017) Alfonso Cuarón (2018) Bong Joon-ho / Sam Mendes (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Daniel Kwan and Daniel Scheinert (2022) Christopher Nolan (2023) Jon M. Chu (2024) v t e Dallas–Fort Worth Film Critics Association Award for Best Director Kevin Costner (1990) Oliver Stone (1991) Clint Eastwood (1992) Steven Spielberg (1993) Quentin Tarantino (1994) Mike Figgis (1995) Joel Coen (1996) James Cameron (1997) Steven Spielberg (1998) Sam Mendes (1999) Steven Soderbergh (2000) Ron Howard (2001) Peter Jackson (2002) Peter Jackson (2003) Martin Scorsese (2004) Ang Lee (2005) Martin Scorsese (2006) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007) Danny Boyle (2008) Jason Reitman (2009) David Fincher (2010) Alexander Payne (2011) Kathryn Bigelow (2012) Alfonso Cuarón (2013) Alejandro G. Iñárritu (2014) Alejandro G. Iñárritu (2015) Barry Jenkins (2016) Guillermo del Toro (2017) Alfonso Cuarón (2018) Sam Mendes (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Daniel Kwan and Daniel Scheinert (2022) Christopher Nolan (2023) Sean Baker (2024) v t e David O. Selznick Achievement Award Hal Roach (1989) Stanley Kramer (1990) Pandro S. Berman (1991) David Brown and Richard D. Zanuck (1992) Saul Zaentz (1993) Howard W. Koch (1994) Walter Mirisch (1995) Billy Wilder (1996) Clint Eastwood (1997) Steven Bochco (1998) Jerry Bruckheimer (1999) Brian Grazer (2000) Lawrence Gordon (2001) Robert Evans (2002) Dino De Laurentiis (2003) Laura Ziskin (2004) Roger Corman (2005) Douglas Wick and Lucy Fisher (2006) Kathleen Kennedy and Frank Marshall (2007) Michael Douglas (2008) John Lasseter (2009) Scott Rudin (2010) Steven Spielberg (2011) Eric Fellner and Tim Bevan (2012) Barbara Broccoli and Michael G. Wilson (2013) Gale Anne Hurd (2014) David Heyman (2015) Irwin Winkler (2016) Charles Roven (2017) Kevin Feige (2018) Dede Gardner , Jeremy Kleiner and Brad Pitt (2019) Mary Parent (2021) Tom Cruise (2022) Martin Scorsese (2023) Chris Meledandri (2024) v t e Detroit Film Critics Society Award for Best Director Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007) Danny Boyle (2008) Pete Docter (2009) Danny Boyle (2010) Michel Hazanavicius (2011) David O. Russell (2012) Alfonso Cuarón (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) George Miller (2015) Damien Chazelle (2016) Sean Baker (2017) Adam McKay (2018) Martin Scorsese (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Lin-Manuel Miranda (2021) v t e Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film 1948–1975 Joseph L. Mankiewicz (1948) Robert Rossen (1949) Joseph L. Mankiewicz (1950) George Stevens (1951) John Ford (1952) Fred Zinnemann (1953) Elia Kazan (1954) Delbert Mann (1955) George Stevens (1956) David Lean (1957) Vincente Minnelli (1958) William Wyler (1959) Billy Wilder (1960) Jerome Robbins and Robert Wise (1961) David Lean (1962) Tony Richardson (1963) George Cukor (1964) Robert Wise (1965) Fred Zinnemann (1966) Mike Nichols (1967) Anthony Harvey (1968) John Schlesinger (1969) Franklin J. Schaffner (1970) William Friedkin (1971) Francis Ford Coppola (1972) George Roy Hill (1973) Francis Ford Coppola (1974) Miloš Forman (1975) 1976–2000 John G. Avildsen (1976) Woody Allen (1977) Michael Cimino (1978) Robert Benton (1979) Robert Redford (1980) Warren Beatty (1981) Richard Attenborough (1982) James L. Brooks (1983) Miloš Forman (1984) Steven Spielberg (1985) Oliver Stone (1986) Bernardo Bertolucci (1987) Barry Levinson (1988) Oliver Stone (1989) Kevin Costner (1990) Jonathan Demme (1991) Clint Eastwood (1992) Steven Spielberg (1993) Robert Zemeckis (1994) Ron Howard (1995) Anthony Minghella (1996) James Cameron (1997) Steven Spielberg (1998) Sam Mendes (1999) Ang Lee (2000) 2001–present Ron Howard (2001) Rob Marshall (2002) Peter Jackson (2003) Clint Eastwood (2004) Ang Lee (2005) Martin Scorsese (2006) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007) Danny Boyle (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) Tom Hooper (2010) Michel Hazanavicius (2011) Ben Affleck (2012) Alfonso Cuarón (2013) Alejandro G. Iñárritu (2014) Alejandro G. Iñárritu (2015) Damien Chazelle (2016) Guillermo del Toro (2017) Alfonso Cuarón (2018) Sam Mendes (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Daniel Kwan and Daniel Scheinert (2022) Christopher Nolan (2023) Sean Baker (2024) v t e Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Drama Series 1971–2000 Daniel Petrie for "Hands of Love" (1971) Robert Butler for "Dust Bowl Cousins" (1972) Charles S. Dubin for "Knockover" (1973) David Friedkin for "Cross Your Heart, Hope to Die" (1974) James Cellan Jones for Jennie: Lady Randolph Churchill (1975) Glenn Jordan for "Rites of Friendship" (1976) John Erman for "Second Hour" (1977) Gene Reynolds for "Prisoner" (1978) Roger Young for "Cop" (1979) Roger Young for "Lou" (1980) Robert Butler for " Hill Street Station " (1981) David Anspaugh for "Personal Foul" (1982) Jeff Bleckner for "Life in the Minors" (1983) Thomas Carter for "The Rise and Fall of Paul the Wall" (1984) Will Mackenzie for "My Fair David" (1985) Will Mackenzie for "Atomic Shakespeare" (1986) Marshall Herskovitz for "Pilot" ( thirtysomething ) (1987) Marshall Herskovitz for "Therapy" (1988) Eric Laneuville for "I'm in the Nude" (1989) Michael Zinberg for "Vietnam" (1990) Eric Laneuville for "All God's Children" (1991) Rob Thompson for "Cicely" (1992) Gregory Hoblit for "Pilot" ( NYPD Blue ) (1993) Charles Haid for "Into That Good Night" (1994) Christopher Chulack for "Hell and High Water" (1995) Christopher Chulack for "Fear of Flying" (1996) Barbara Kopple for "The Documentary" (1997) Paris Barclay for " Hearts and Souls " (1998) David Chase for " The Sopranos " (1999) Thomas Schlamme for " Noël " (2000) 2001–present Alan Ball for "Pilot" ( Six Feet Under ) (2001) John Patterson for " Whitecaps " (2002) Chris Misiano for " Twenty Five " (2003) Walter Hill for " Deadwood " (2004) Michael Apted for " The Stolen Eagle " (2005) Jon Cassar for " Day 5: 7:00 a.m. – 8:00 a.m.

" (2006) Alan Taylor for " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " (2007) Daniel Attias for " Transitions " (2008) Lesli Linka Glatter for " Guy Walks Into an Advertising Agency " (2009) Martin Scorsese for " Boardwalk Empire " (2010) Patty Jenkins for "Pilot" ( The Killing ) (2011) Rian Johnson for " Fifty-One " (2012) Vince Gilligan for " Felina " (2013) Lesli Linka Glatter for " From A to B and Back Again " (2014) David Nutter for " Mother's Mercy " (2015) Miguel Sapochnik for " Battle of the Bastards " (2016) Reed Morano for " Offred " (2017) Adam McKay for " Celebration " (2018) Nicole Kassell for " It's Summer and We're Running Out of Ice " (2019) Lesli Linka Glatter for " Prisoners of War " (2020) Mark Mylod for " All the Bells Say " (2021) Sam Levinson for "Stand Still Like the Hummingbird" (2022) Peter Hoar for " Long, Long Time " (2023) Frederick E. O. Toye for " Crimson Sky " (2024) v t e Directors Guild of America Lifetime Achievement Award – Feature Film Cecil B. DeMille (1952) John Ford (1953) Henry King (1955) King Vidor (1956) Frank Capra (1958) George Stevens (1959) Frank Borzage (1960) William Wyler (1965) Alfred Hitchcock (1967) Fred Zinnemann (1969) David Lean and William A. Wellman (1972) George Cukor (1980) Rouben Mamoulian (1981) John Huston (1982) Orson Welles (1983) Billy Wilder (1984) Joseph L. Mankiewicz (1985) Elia Kazan (1986) Robert Wise (1987) Ingmar Bergman (1989) Akira Kurosawa (1991) Sidney Lumet (1992) Robert Altman (1993) James Ivory (1994) Woody Allen (1995) Stanley Kubrick (1996) Francis Ford Coppola (1997) Steven Spielberg (1999) Martin Scorsese (2002) Mike Nichols (2003) Clint Eastwood (2005) Norman Jewison (2009) Miloš Forman (2012) Ridley Scott (2016) Spike Lee (2021) Ang Lee (2024) v t e Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series 1950s Jack Smight for "Eddie" (1959) 1960s Robert Mulligan for The Moon and Sixpence (1960) George Schaefer for Macbeth (1961) Franklin J. Schaffner for The Defenders (1962) Stuart Rosenberg for "The Madman" (1963) Tom Gries for "Who Do You Kill?" (1964) Paul Bogart for "The 700 Year Old Gang" (1965) Sydney Pollack for "The Game" (1966) Alex Segal for Death of a Salesman (1967) Paul Bogart for "Dear Friends" (1968) David Greene for "The People Next Door" (1969) 1970s Paul Bogart for "Shadow Game" (1970) Daryl Duke for "The Day the Lion Died" (1971) Alexander Singer for "The Invasion of Kevin Ireland" (1972) Jerry Thorpe for "An Eye for an Eye" (1973) Robert Butler for "Part III" (1974) Bill Bain for "A Sudden Storm" (1975) David Greene for "Part I: Chapters 1 & 2" ( Rich Man, Poor Man ) (1976) David Greene for "Part 1" ( Roots ) (1977) Marvin J. Chomsky for Holocaust (1978) Jackie Cooper for "Pilot" ( The White Shadow ) (1979) 1980s Roger Young for "Cop" (1980) Robert Butler for " Hill Street Station "(1981) Harry Harris for "To Soar and Never Falter" (1982) Jeff Bleckner for "Life in the Minors" (1983) Corey Allen for "Goodbye, Mr. Scripps" (1984) Karen Arthur for "Heat" (1985) Georg Stanford Brown for "Parting Shots" (1986) Gregory Hoblit for "Pilot" ( L.A. Law ) (1987) Mark Tinker for "Weigh In, Way Out" (1988) Robert Altman for "The Boiler Room" (1989) 1990s Thomas Carter for "Promises to Keep" / Scott Winant for "The Go-Between" (1990) Thomas Carter for "In Confidence" (1991) Eric Laneuville for "All God's Children" (1992) Barry Levinson for " Gone for Goode " (1993) Daniel Sackheim for "Tempest in a C-Cup" (1994) Mimi Leder for " Love's Labor Lost " (1995) Jeremy Kagan for "Leave of Absence" (1996) Mark Tinker for "Where's 'Swaldo?" (1997) Mark Tinker for "Pilot" ( Brooklyn South ) / Paris Barclay for "Lost Israel, Part 2" (1998) Paris Barclay for " Hearts and Souls " (1999) 2000s Thomas Schlamme for "Pilot" ( The West Wing ) (2000) Thomas Schlamme for "In the Shadow of Two Gunmen: Part I" & "Part II" (2001) Alan Ball for "Pilot" ( Six Feet Under ) (2002) Christopher Misiano for " Twenty Five " (2003) Walter Hill for " Deadwood " (2004) J. J. Abrams for "Pilot" ( Lost ) (2005) Jon Cassar for " Day 5: 7:00 a.m. – 8:00 a.m.

" (2006) Alan Taylor for " Kennedy and Heidi " (2007) Greg Yaitanes for " House's Head " (2008) Rod Holcomb for " And in the End...

" (2009) 2010s Steve Shill for " The Getaway " (2010) Martin Scorsese for " Boardwalk Empire " (2011) Tim Van Patten for " To the Lost " (2012) David Fincher for " Chapter 1 " (2013) Cary Joji Fukunaga for " Who Goes There " (2014) David Nutter for " Mother's Mercy " (2015) Miguel Sapochnik for " Battle of the Bastards " (2016) Reed Morano for " Offred " (2017) Stephen Daldry for "Paterfamilias" (2018) Jason Bateman for "Reparations" (2019) 2020s Andrij Parekh for " Hunting " (2020) Jessica Hobbs for "War" (2021) Hwang Dong-hyuk for "Red Light, Green Light" (2022) Mark Mylod for " Connor's Wedding " (2023) Frederick E. O. Toye for " Crimson Sky " (2024) v t e Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Documentary/Nonfiction Program 1979–1994 John Korty (1979) Charles A. Bangert and Alfred R. Kelman (1983) Emile Ardolino (1984) David Heeley (1986) Gene Lasko (1990) Bob Eisenhardt, Susan Froemke , Peter Gelb , and Albert Maysles (1991) Fax Bahr, George Hickenlooper , and Eleanor Coppola (1992) Bill Couturié / Lee Stanley (1993) Robin Lehman (1994) 2003–present Stanley Nelson Jr.

(2003) Kate Davis (2004) James Miller (2005) Jon Alpert and Matthew O'Neill (2006) Spike Lee (2007) Adam Beckman and Christopher Wilcha (2008) Marina Zenovich (2009) Barak Goodman (2010) Josh Fox (2011) Martin Scorsese (2012) Robert Trachtenberg (2013) Jehane Noujaim (2014) Alex Gibney (2015) Moira Demos and Laura Ricciardi (2016) Ezra Edelman (2017) Brett Morgen (2018) Elizabeth Chai Vasarhelyi and Jimmy Chin (2019) Steven Bognar and Julia Reichert (2020) Kirsten Johnson (2021) Peter Jackson (2022) Davis Guggenheim (2023) Amanda McBaine and Jesse Moss (2024) Between 1979–1994, the category was a juried award.

v t e Evelyn F. Burkey Award 1970s Fred Coe (1978) Barbara Schultz (1979) 1980s Walter Cronkite (1980) Elmer Lower (1981) Herman Brodkin (1982) Alan Wagner (1983) Leonard Wasser (1984) Jerome B. Lurie (1985) Athol Fugard & Lloyd Richards (1986) Edwin Newman (1987) Andy Rooney , Local 1101 & District 1 of the Communications Workers of America (1988) Horton Foote (1989) 1990s Art Buchwald (1990) George Schaefer (1991) Jacqueline Babbin (1992) Arthur Miller (1993) Joan Ganz Cooney (1994) Dennis Potter (1995) Ken Saro-Wiwa (1996) Sidney Lumet (1997) Judy Crichton (1998) David Brown (1999) 2000s Václav Havel (2000) Tom Fontana (2001) Colin Callender (2002) Martin Scorsese (2003) John McCain (2004) Claire Labine (2005) Museum of Television and Radio (2006) Joan Didion (2007) Walter Bernstein (2008) Committee to Protect Journalists (2009) 2010s Edward Albee (2010) Archive of American Television (2011) Not Presented (2012) Not Presented (2013) James Schamus (2014) Norman Lear (2015) Al Franken (2016) Not Presented (2017) Not Presented (2018) Franklin Leonard (2019) 2020s Not Presented (2020) Not Presented (2021) Dick Cavett (2022) Not Presented (2023) v t e Film Society of Lincoln Center Gala Tribute Honorees Charlie Chaplin (1972) Fred Astaire (1973) Alfred Hitchcock (1974) Joanne Woodward and Paul Newman (1975) George Cukor (1978) Bob Hope (1979) John Huston (1980) Barbara Stanwyck (1981) Billy Wilder (1982) Laurence Olivier (1983) Claudette Colbert (1984) Federico Fellini (1985) Elizabeth Taylor (1986) Alec Guinness (1987) Yves Montand (1988) Bette Davis (1989) James Stewart (1990) Audrey Hepburn (1991) Gregory Peck (1992) Jack Lemmon (1993) Robert Altman (1994) Shirley MacLaine (1995) Clint Eastwood (1996) Sean Connery (1997) Martin Scorsese (1998) Mike Nichols (1999) Al Pacino (2000) Jane Fonda (2001) Francis Ford Coppola (2002) Susan Sarandon (2003) Michael Caine (2004) Dustin Hoffman (2005) Jessica Lange (2006) Diane Keaton (2007) Meryl Streep (2008) Tom Hanks (2009) Michael Douglas (2010) Sidney Poitier (2011) Catherine Deneuve (2012) Barbra Streisand (2013) Rob Reiner (2014) Robert Redford (2015) Morgan Freeman (2016) Robert De Niro (2017) Helen Mirren (2018) Spike Lee (2020) Cate Blanchett (2022) Viola Davis (2023) Jeff Bridges (2024) Pedro Almodóvar (2025) v t e Florida Film Critics Circle Award for Best Director Joel Coen (1996) Curtis Hanson (1997) Peter Weir (1998) Sam Mendes (1999) Steven Soderbergh (2000) Peter Jackson (2001) Martin Scorsese (2002) Peter Jackson (2003) Alexander Payne (2004) Ang Lee (2005) Martin Scorsese (2006) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007) Danny Boyle (2008) Jason Reitman (2009) David Fincher (2010) Martin Scorsese (2011) Ben Affleck (2012) Steve McQueen (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) George Miller (2015) Damien Chazelle (2016) Christopher Nolan (2017) Alfonso Cuarón (2018) Céline Sciamma (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Park Chan-wook (2022) Todd Haynes (2023) Bertrand Bonello (2024) v t e George Pal Memorial Award C. Dean Anderson (1975) Don Fanzo (1975) Gloria Swanson (1975) Fay Wray (1975) John Badham (1980) Nicholas Meyer (1984) Douglas Trumbull (1985) Charles Band (1986) Arnold Leibovit (1987) Larry Cohen (1988) David Cronenberg (1989) William Friedkin (1991) Gene Roddenberry (1992) Frank Marshall (1993) Wah Chang (1994) Gene Warren (1994) Stan Winston (1994) Robert Zemeckis (1995) John Carpenter (1996) Kathleen Kennedy (1997) Dean Devlin (1998) Ray Bradbury (1999) Douglas Wick (2000) Sam Raimi (2001) Samuel Z. Arkoff (2002) Ridley Scott (2004) Ray Harryhausen (2006) Guillermo del Toro (2008) Alex Kurtzman & Roberto Orci (2010) Martin Scorsese (2012) Gregory Nicotero (2014) Simon Kinberg (2015) Dave Filoni (2022/2023) Back to the Future (2023/2024) v t e Golden Globe Award for Best Director 1943–1975 Henry King (1943) Leo McCarey (1944) Billy Wilder (1945) Frank Capra (1946) Elia Kazan (1947) John Huston (1948) Robert Rossen (1949) Billy Wilder (1950) László Benedek (1951) Cecil B. DeMille (1952) Fred Zinnemann (1953) Elia Kazan (1954) Joshua Logan (1955) Elia Kazan (1956) David Lean (1957) Vincente Minnelli (1958) William Wyler (1959) Jack Cardiff (1960) Stanley Kramer (1961) David Lean (1962) Elia Kazan (1963) George Cukor (1964) David Lean (1965) Fred Zinnemann (1966) Mike Nichols (1967) Paul Newman (1968) Charles Jarrott (1969) Arthur Hiller (1970) William Friedkin (1971) Francis Ford Coppola (1972) William Friedkin (1973) Roman Polanski (1974) Miloš Forman (1975) 1976–present Sidney Lumet (1976) Herbert Ross (1977) Michael Cimino (1978) Francis Ford Coppola (1979) Robert Redford (1980) Warren Beatty (1981) Richard Attenborough (1982) Barbra Streisand (1983) Miloš Forman (1984) John Huston (1985) Oliver Stone (1986) Bernardo Bertolucci (1987) Clint Eastwood (1988) Oliver Stone (1989) Kevin Costner (1990) Oliver Stone (1991) Clint Eastwood (1992) Steven Spielberg (1993) Robert Zemeckis (1994) Mel Gibson (1995) Miloš Forman (1996) James Cameron (1997) Steven Spielberg (1998) Sam Mendes (1999) Ang Lee (2000) Robert Altman (2001) Martin Scorsese (2002) Peter Jackson (2003) Clint Eastwood (2004) Ang Lee (2005) Martin Scorsese (2006) Julian Schnabel (2007) Danny Boyle (2008) James Cameron (2009) David Fincher (2010) Martin Scorsese (2011) Ben Affleck (2012) Alfonso Cuarón (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) Alejandro G. Iñárritu (2015) Damien Chazelle (2016) Guillermo del Toro (2017) Alfonso Cuarón (2018) Sam Mendes (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Steven Spielberg (2022) Christopher Nolan (2023) Brady Corbet (2024) v t e Golden Lion for Lifetime Achievement Luis Buñuel (1969) Orson Welles (1970) John Ford / Marcel Carné / Ingmar Bergman (1971) Charlie Chaplin / Anatoli Golovnya / Billy Wilder (1972) Alessandro Blasetti / Luis Buñuel / Frank Capra / George Cukor / Jean-Luc Godard / Alexander Kluge / Akira Kurosawa / Michael Powell / Satyajit Ray / King Vidor / Sergei Yutkevich / Cesare Zavattini (1982) Michelangelo Antonioni (1983) Federico Fellini (1985) Paolo and Vittorio Taviani (1986) Luigi Comencini / Joseph L. Mankiewicz (1987) Joris Ivens (1988) Robert Bresson (1989) Miklós Jancsó / Marcello Mastroianni (1990) Mario Monicelli / Gian Maria Volonté (1991) Francis Ford Coppola / Jeanne Moreau / Paolo Villaggio (1992) Claudia Cardinale / Robert De Niro / Roman Polanski / Steven Spielberg (1993) Suso Cecchi d'Amico / Ken Loach / Al Pacino (1994) Woody Allen / Giuseppe De Santis / Goffredo Lombardo / Ennio Morricone / Alain Resnais / Martin Scorsese / Alberto Sordi / Monica Vitti (1995) Robert Altman / Vittorio Gassman / Dustin Hoffman / Michèle Morgan (1996) Gérard Depardieu / Stanley Kubrick / Alida Valli (1997) Warren Beatty / Sophia Loren / Andrzej Wajda (1998) Jerry Lewis (1999) Clint Eastwood (2000) Éric Rohmer (2001) Dino Risi (2002) Dino De Laurentiis / Omar Sharif (2003) Manoel de Oliveira / Stanley Donen (2004) Hayao Miyazaki / Stefania Sandrelli (2005) David Lynch (2006) Tim Burton (2007) Ermanno Olmi (2008) John Lasseter (2009) John Woo (2010) Marco Bellocchio (2011) Francesco Rosi (2012) William Friedkin (2013) Thelma Schoonmaker / Frederick Wiseman (2014) Bertrand Tavernier (2015) Jean-Paul Belmondo / Jerzy Skolimowski (2016) Jane Fonda / Robert Redford (2017) David Cronenberg / Vanessa Redgrave (2018) Pedro Almodóvar / Julie Andrews (2019) Ann Hui / Tilda Swinton (2020) Roberto Benigni / Jamie Lee Curtis (2021) Catherine Deneuve / Paul Schrader (2022) Liliana Cavani / Tony Leung Chiu-wai (2023) Sigourney Weaver / Peter Weir (2024) Kim Novak / Werner Herzog (2025) v t e Hasty Pudding Men of the Year Bob Hope (1967) Paul Newman (1968) Bill Cosby (1969) Robert Redford (1970) James Stewart (1971) Dustin Hoffman (1972) Jack Lemmon (1973) Peter Falk (1974) Warren Beatty (1975) Robert Blake (1976) Johnny Carson (1977) Richard Dreyfuss (1978) Robert De Niro (1979) Alan Alda (1980) John Travolta (1981) James Cagney (1982) Steven Spielberg (1983) Sean Connery (1984) Bill Murray (1985) Sylvester Stallone (1986) Mikhail Baryshnikov (1987) Steve Martin (1988) Robin Williams (1989) Kevin Costner (1990) Clint Eastwood (1991) Michael Douglas (1992) Chevy Chase (1993) Tom Cruise (1994) Tom Hanks (1995) Harrison Ford (1996) Mel Gibson (1997) Kevin Kline (1998) Samuel L. Jackson (1999) Billy Crystal (2000) Anthony Hopkins (2001) Bruce Willis (2002) Martin Scorsese (2003) Robert Downey Jr.

(2004) Tim Robbins (2005) Richard Gere (2006) Ben Stiller (2007) Christopher Walken (2008) James Franco (2009) Justin Timberlake (2010) Jay Leno (2011) Jason Segel (2012) Kiefer Sutherland (2013) Neil Patrick Harris (2014) Chris Pratt (2015) Joseph Gordon-Levitt (2016) Ryan Reynolds (2017) Paul Rudd (2018) Milo Ventimiglia (2019) Ben Platt (2020) Jason Bateman (2022) Bob Odenkirk (2023) Barry Keoghan (2024) Jon Hamm (2025) v t e Honorary César 1976–2000 Ingrid Bergman (1976) Diana Ross (1976) Henri Langlois (1977) Jacques Tati (1977) Robert Dorfmann (1978) René Goscinny (1978) Marcel Carné (1979) Charles Vanel (1979) Walt Disney (1979) Pierre Braunberger (1980) Louis de Funès (1980) Kirk Douglas (1980) Marcel Pagnol (1981) Alain Resnais (1981) Georges Dancigers (1982) Alexandre Mnouchkine (1982) Jean Nény (1982) Andrzej Wajda (1982) Raimu (1983) René Clément (1984) Georges de Beauregard (1984) Edwige Feuillère (1984) Christian-Jaque (1985) Danielle Darrieux (1985) Christine Gouze-Rénal (1985) Alain Poiré (1985) Maurice Jarre (1986) Bette Davis (1986) Jean Delannoy (1986) René Ferracci (1986) Claude Lanzmann (1986) Jean-Luc Godard (1987) Serge Silberman (1988) Bernard Blier (1989) Paul Grimault (1989) Gérard Philipe (1990) Jean-Pierre Aumont (1991) Sophia Loren (1991) Michèle Morgan (1992) Sylvester Stallone (1992) Jean Marais (1993) Marcello Mastroianni (1993) Gérard Oury (1993) Jean Carmet (1994) Jeanne Moreau (1995) Gregory Peck (1995) Steven Spielberg (1995) Lauren Bacall (1996) Henri Verneuil (1996) Charles Aznavour (1997) Andie MacDowell (1997) Michael Douglas (1998) Clint Eastwood (1998) Jean-Luc Godard (1998) Pedro Almodóvar (1999) Johnny Depp (1999) Jean Rochefort (1999) Josiane Balasko (2000) Georges Cravenne (2000) Jean-Pierre Léaud (2000) Martin Scorsese (2000) 2001–present Darry Cowl (2001) Charlotte Rampling (2001) Agnès Varda (2001) Anouk Aimée (2002) Jeremy Irons (2002) Claude Rich (2002) Bernadette Lafont (2003) Spike Lee (2003) Meryl Streep (2003) Micheline Presle (2004) Jacques Dutronc (2005) Will Smith (2005) Hugh Grant (2006) Pierre Richard (2006) Marlène Jobert (2007) Jude Law (2007) Jeanne Moreau (2008) Roberto Benigni (2008) Romy Schneider (2008) Dustin Hoffman (2009) Harrison Ford (2010) Quentin Tarantino (2011) Kate Winslet (2012) Kevin Costner (2013) Scarlett Johansson (2014) Sean Penn (2015) Michael Douglas (2016) George Clooney (2017) Penélope Cruz (2018) Robert Redford (2019) Cate Blanchett (2022) David Fincher (2023) Agnès Jaoui (2024) Christopher Nolan (2024) Julia Roberts (2025) Costa-Gavras (2025) v t e Honorary Golden Bear James Stewart (1982) Alec Guinness (1988) Dustin Hoffman (1989) Oliver Stone (1990) Gregory Peck / Billy Wilder (1993) Sophia Loren (1994) Alain Delon (1995) Elia Kazan / Jack Lemmon (1996) Kim Novak (1997) Catherine Deneuve (1998) Shirley MacLaine (1999) Jeanne Moreau (2000) Kirk Douglas (2001) Robert Altman / Claudia Cardinale (2002) Anouk Aimée (2003) Fernando Solanas (2004) Fernando Fernán Gómez / Im Kwon-taek (2005) Ian McKellen / Andrzej Wajda (2006) Arthur Penn (2007) Francesco Rosi (2008) Maurice Jarre (2009) Wolfgang Kohlhaase / Hanna Schygulla (2010) Armin Mueller-Stahl (2011) Meryl Streep (2012) Claude Lanzmann (2013) Ken Loach (2014) Wim Wenders (2015) Michael Ballhaus (2016) Milena Canonero (2017) Willem Dafoe (2018) Charlotte Rampling (2019) Helen Mirren (2020) Isabelle Huppert (2022) Steven Spielberg (2023) Martin Scorsese (2024) Tilda Swinton (2025) v t e IFFI Satyajit Ray Lifetime Achievement Award 1999–2020 IFFI Lifetime Achievement Award Bernardo Bertolucci (30th) Liv Ullmann (34th) Dilip Kumar (38th) Lata Mangeshkar (38th) Bertrand Tavernier (42nd) Krzysztof Zanussi (43rd) Jiří Menzel (44th) Wong Kar-wai (45th) Nikita Mikhalkov (46th) Im Kwon-taek (47th) Atom Egoyan (48th) Dan Wolman (49th) Isabelle Huppert (50th) Vittorio Storaro (51st) 2021–present IFFI Satyajit Ray Lifetime Achievement Award Martin Scorsese (52nd) István Szabó (52nd) Carlos Saura (53rd) Michael Douglas (54th) Phillip Noyce (55th) v t e Independent Spirit Award for Best Director 1980s Joel Coen / Martin Scorsese (1985) Oliver Stone (1986) John Huston (1987) Ramon Menendez (1988) Steven Soderbergh (1989) 1990s Charles Burnett (1990) Martha Coolidge (1991) Carl Franklin (1992) Robert Altman (1993) Quentin Tarantino (1994) Mike Figgis (1995) Joel Coen (1996) Robert Duvall (1997) Wes Anderson (1998) Alexander Payne (1999) 2000s Ang Lee (2000) Christopher Nolan (2001) Todd Haynes (2002) Sofia Coppola (2003) Alexander Payne (2004) Ang Lee (2005) Jonathan Dayton and Valerie Faris (2006) Julian Schnabel (2007) Tom McCarthy (2008) Lee Daniels (2009) 2010s Darren Aronofsky (2010) Michel Hazanavicius (2011) David O. Russell (2012) Steve McQueen (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) Tom McCarthy (2015) Barry Jenkins (2016) Jordan Peele (2017) Barry Jenkins (2018) Safdie brothers (2019) 2020s Chloé Zhao (2020) Maggie Gyllenhaal (2021) Daniel Kwan and Daniel Scheinert (2022) Celine Song (2023) Sean Baker (2024) v t e Kirk Douglas Award 2007–present Kirk Douglas (2007) John Travolta (2008) Ed Harris (2009) Quentin Tarantino (2010) Harrison Ford (2011) Michael Douglas (2012) Robert De Niro (2013) Forest Whitaker (2014) Jessica Lange (2015) Jane Fonda (2016) Warren Beatty (2017) Judi Dench (2018) Hugh Jackman (2019) Martin Scorsese (2020) Michelle Yeoh (2023) Ryan Gosling (2024) Will Ferrell (2025) Festival editions 2024 2025 v t e Kennedy Center Honorees (2000s) 2000 Mikhail Baryshnikov Chuck Berry Plácido Domingo Clint Eastwood Angela Lansbury 2001 Julie Andrews Van Cliburn Quincy Jones Jack Nicholson Luciano Pavarotti 2002 James Earl Jones James Levine Chita Rivera Paul Simon Elizabeth Taylor 2003 James Brown Carol Burnett Loretta Lynn Mike Nichols Itzhak Perlman 2004 Warren Beatty Ossie Davis & Ruby Dee Elton John Joan Sutherland John Williams 2005 Tony Bennett Suzanne Farrell Julie Harris Robert Redford Tina Turner 2006 Zubin Mehta Dolly Parton Smokey Robinson Steven Spielberg Andrew Lloyd Webber 2007 Leon Fleisher Steve Martin Diana Ross Martin Scorsese Brian Wilson 2008 Morgan Freeman George Jones Barbra Streisand Twyla Tharp Pete Townshend & Roger Daltrey 2009 Mel Brooks Dave Brubeck Grace Bumbry Robert De Niro Bruce Springsteen Complete list 1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s 2010s 2020s v t e London Film Critics' Circle Award for Director of the Year 1980–2000 Nicolas Roeg (1980) Andrzej Wajda (1981) Costa-Gavras (1982) Andrzej Wajda (1983) Neil Jordan (1984) Roland Joffé (1985) Akira Kurosawa (1986) Stanley Kubrick (1987) John Huston (1988) Terence Davies (1989) Woody Allen (1990) Ridley Scott (1991) Robert Altman (1992) James Ivory (1993) Steven Spielberg (1994) Peter Jackson (1995) Joel Coen (1996) Curtis Hanson (1997) Peter Weir (1998) Sam Mendes (1999) Spike Jonze (2000) 2001–present Alejandro González Iñárritu (2001) Phillip Noyce (2002) Clint Eastwood (2003) Martin Scorsese (2004) Ang Lee (2005) Paul Greengrass (2006) Paul Thomas Anderson (2007) David Fincher (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) David Fincher (2010) Michel Hazanavicius (2011) Ang Lee (2012) Alfonso Cuarón (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) George Miller (2015) László Nemes (2016) Sean Baker (2017) Alfonso Cuarón (2018) Bong Joon-ho (2019) Steve McQueen (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Todd Field (2022) Jonathan Glazer (2023) RaMell Ross (2024) v t e Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Director 1975–2000 Sidney Lumet (1975) Sidney Lumet (1976) Herbert Ross (1977) Michael Cimino (1978) Robert Benton (1979) Roman Polanski (1980) Warren Beatty (1981) Steven Spielberg (1982) James L. Brooks (1983) Miloš Forman (1984) Terry Gilliam (1985) David Lynch (1986) John Boorman (1987) David Cronenberg (1988) Spike Lee (1989) Martin Scorsese (1990) Barry Levinson (1991) Clint Eastwood (1992) Jane Campion (1993) Quentin Tarantino (1994) Mike Figgis (1995) Mike Leigh (1996) Curtis Hanson (1997) Steven Spielberg (1998) Sam Mendes (1999) Steven Soderbergh (2000) 2001–present David Lynch (2001) Pedro Almodóvar (2002) Peter Jackson (2003) Alexander Payne (2004) Ang Lee (2005) Paul Greengrass (2006) Paul Thomas Anderson (2007) Danny Boyle (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) Olivier Assayas / David Fincher (2010) Terrence Malick (2011) Paul Thomas Anderson (2012) Alfonso Cuarón (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) George Miller (2015) Barry Jenkins (2016) Guillermo del Toro / Luca Guadagnino (2017) Debra Granik (2018) Bong Joon-ho (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Todd Field (2022) Jonathan Glazer (2023) Mohammad Rasoulof (2024) v t e National Board of Review Award for Best Director 1945–1975 Jean Renoir (1945) William Wyler (1946) Elia Kazan (1947) Roberto Rossellini (1948) Vittorio De Sica (1949) John Huston (1950) Akira Kurosawa (1951) David Lean (1952) George Stevens (1953) Renato Castellani (1954) William Wyler (1955) John Huston (1956) David Lean (1957) John Ford (1958) Fred Zinnemann (1959) Jack Cardiff (1960) Jack Clayton (1961) David Lean (1962) Tony Richardson (1963) Desmond Davis (1964) John Schlesinger (1965) Fred Zinnemann (1966) Richard Brooks (1967) Franco Zeffirelli (1968) Alfred Hitchcock (1969) François Truffaut (1970) Ken Russell (1971) Bob Fosse (1972) Ingmar Bergman (1973) Francis Ford Coppola (1974) Robert Altman / Stanley Kubrick (1975) 1976–present Alan J. Pakula (1976) Luis Buñuel (1977) Ingmar Bergman (1978) John Schlesinger (1979) Robert Redford (1980) Warren Beatty (1981) Sidney Lumet (1982) James L. Brooks (1983) David Lean (1984) Akira Kurosawa (1985) Woody Allen (1986) Steven Spielberg (1987) Alan Parker (1988) Kenneth Branagh (1989) Kevin Costner (1990) Jonathan Demme (1991) James Ivory (1992) Martin Scorsese (1993) Quentin Tarantino (1994) Ang Lee (1995) Joel Coen (1996) Curtis Hanson (1997) Shekhar Kapur (1998) Anthony Minghella (1999) Steven Soderbergh (2000) Todd Field (2001) Phillip Noyce (2002) Edward Zwick (2003) Michael Mann (2004) Ang Lee (2005) Martin Scorsese (2006) Tim Burton (2007) David Fincher (2008) Clint Eastwood (2009) David Fincher (2010) Martin Scorsese (2011) Kathryn Bigelow (2012) Spike Jonze (2013) Clint Eastwood (2014) Ridley Scott (2015) Barry Jenkins (2016) Greta Gerwig (2017) Bradley Cooper (2018) Quentin Tarantino (2019) Spike Lee (2020) Paul Thomas Anderson (2021) Steven Spielberg (2022) Martin Scorsese (2023) Jon M. Chu (2024) v t e National Board of Review Award for Best Adapted Screenplay Ted Tally (2000) Robert Festinger and Todd Field (2001) Charlie Kaufman (2002) Anthony Minghella (2003) Alexander Payne and Jim Taylor (2004) Stephen Gaghan (2005) Ron Nyswaner (2006) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007) Simon Beaufoy / Eric Roth (2008) Jason Reitman and Sheldon Turner (2009) Aaron Sorkin (2010) Nat Faxon , Alexander Payne and Jim Rash (2011) David O. Russell (2012) Terence Winter (2013) Paul Thomas Anderson (2014) Drew Goddard (2015) Jay Cocks and Martin Scorsese (2016) Scott Neustadter and Michael H. Weber (2017) Barry Jenkins (2018) Steven Zaillian (2019) Paul Greengrass and Luke Davies (2020) Joel Coen (2021) Edward Berger , Lesley Paterson and Ian Stokell (2022) Tony McNamara (2023) Clint Bentley and Greg Kwedar (2024) v t e National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Director 1966–2000 Michelangelo Antonioni (1966) Ingmar Bergman (1967) Ingmar Bergman (1968) François Truffaut (1969) Ingmar Bergman (1970) Bernardo Bertolucci (1971) Luis Buñuel (1972) François Truffaut (1973) Francis Ford Coppola (1974) Robert Altman (1975) Martin Scorsese (1976) Luis Buñuel (1977) Terrence Malick (1978) Woody Allen / Robert Benton (1979) Martin Scorsese (1980) Louis Malle (1981) Steven Spielberg (1982) Paolo Taviani and Vittorio Taviani (1983) Robert Bresson (1984) John Huston (1985) David Lynch (1986) John Boorman (1987) Philip Kaufman (1988) Gus Van Sant (1989) Martin Scorsese (1990) David Cronenberg (1991) Clint Eastwood (1992) Steven Spielberg (1993) Quentin Tarantino (1994) Mike Figgis (1995) Lars von Trier (1996) Curtis Hanson (1997) Steven Soderbergh (1998) Mike Leigh (1999) Steven Soderbergh (2000) 2001–present Robert Altman (2001) Roman Polanski (2002) Clint Eastwood (2003) Zhang Yimou (2004) David Cronenberg (2005) Paul Greengrass (2006) Paul Thomas Anderson (2007) Mike Leigh (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) David Fincher (2010) Terrence Malick (2011) Michael Haneke (2012) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) Todd Haynes (2015) Barry Jenkins (2016) Greta Gerwig (2017) Alfonso Cuarón (2018) Greta Gerwig (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Ryusuke Hamaguchi (2021) Charlotte Wells (2022) Jonathan Glazer (2023) Payal Kapadia (2024) v t e New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Director 1935–1975 John Ford (1935) Rouben Mamoulian (1936) Gregory La Cava (1937) Alfred Hitchcock (1938) John Ford (1939) John Ford (1940) John Ford (1941) John Farrow (1942) George Stevens (1943) Leo McCarey (1944) Billy Wilder (1945) William Wyler (1946) Elia Kazan (1947) John Huston (1948) Carol Reed (1949) Joseph L. Mankiewicz (1950) Elia Kazan (1951) Fred Zinnemann (1952) Fred Zinnemann (1953) Elia Kazan (1954) David Lean (1955) John Huston (1956) David Lean (1957) Stanley Kramer (1958) Fred Zinnemann (1959) Jack Cardiff / Billy Wilder (1960) Robert Rossen (1961) No Award (1962) Tony Richardson (1963) Stanley Kubrick (1964) John Schlesinger (1965) Fred Zinnemann (1966) Mike Nichols (1967) Paul Newman (1968) Costa-Gavras (1969) Bob Rafelson (1970) Stanley Kubrick (1971) Ingmar Bergman (1972) François Truffaut (1973) Federico Fellini (1974) Robert Altman (1975) 1976–present Alan J. Pakula (1976) Woody Allen (1977) Terrence Malick (1978) Woody Allen (1979) Jonathan Demme (1980) Sidney Lumet (1981) Sydney Pollack (1982) Ingmar Bergman (1983) David Lean (1984) John Huston (1985) Woody Allen (1986) James L. Brooks (1987) Chris Menges (1988) Paul Mazursky (1989) Martin Scorsese (1990) Jonathan Demme (1991) Robert Altman (1992) Jane Campion (1993) Quentin Tarantino (1994) Ang Lee (1995) Lars von Trier (1996) Curtis Hanson (1997) Terrence Malick (1998) Mike Leigh (1999) Steven Soderbergh (2000) Robert Altman (2001) Todd Haynes (2002) Sofia Coppola (2003) Clint Eastwood (2004) Ang Lee (2005) Martin Scorsese (2006) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007) Mike Leigh (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) David Fincher (2010) Michel Hazanavicius (2011) Kathryn Bigelow (2012) Steve McQueen (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) Todd Haynes (2015) Barry Jenkins (2016) Sean Baker (2017) Alfonso Cuarón (2018) Joshua Safdie and Benjamin Safdie (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Jane Campion (2021) S. S. Rajamouli (2022) Christopher Nolan (2023) RaMell Ross (2024) v t e Online Film Critics Society Award for Best Director James Cameron (1997) Steven Spielberg (1998) Sam Mendes (1999) Darren Aronofsky (2000) David Lynch (2001) Peter Jackson (2002) Peter Jackson (2003) Michel Gondry (2004) David Cronenberg (2005) Martin Scorsese (2006) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007) Christopher Nolan (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) David Fincher (2010) Terrence Malick (2011) Paul Thomas Anderson (2012) Alfonso Cuarón (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) George Miller (2015) Barry Jenkins (2016) Christopher Nolan (2017) Alfonso Cuarón (2018) Bong Joon-ho (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Daniel Kwan and Daniel Scheinert (2022) Christopher Nolan (2023) Coralie Fargeat (2024) v t e Laureates of the Prince or Princess of Asturias Award for the Arts Prince of Asturias Award for the Arts 1981: Jesús López Cobos 1982: Pablo Serrano 1983: Eusebio Sempere 1984: Orfeón Donostiarra 1985: Antonio López García 1986: Luis García Berlanga 1987: Eduardo Chillida 1988: Jorge Oteiza 1989: Oscar Niemeyer 1990: Antoni Tàpies 1991: Victoria de los Ángeles , Teresa Berganza , Montserrat Caballé , José Carreras , Pilar Lorengar , Alfredo Kraus and Plácido Domingo 1992: Roberto Matta 1993: Francisco Javier Sáenz de Oiza 1994: Alicia de Larrocha 1995: Fernando Fernán Gómez 1996: Joaquín Rodrigo 1997: Vittorio Gassman 1998: Sebastião Salgado 1999: Santiago Calatrava 2000: Barbara Hendricks 2001: Krzysztof Penderecki 2002: Woody Allen 2003: Miquel Barceló 2004: Paco de Lucía 2005: Maya Plisetskaya and Tamara Rojo 2006: Pedro Almodóvar 2007: Bob Dylan 2008: Sistema de Orquesta Juvenil e Infantil de Venezuela 2009: Norman Foster 2010: Richard Serra 2011: Riccardo Muti 2012: Rafael Moneo 2013: Michael Haneke 2014: Frank Gehry Princess of Asturias Award for the Arts 2015: Francis Ford Coppola 2016: Núria Espert 2017: William Kentridge 2018: Martin Scorsese 2019: Peter Brook 2020: Ennio Morricone and John Williams 2021: Marina Abramović 2022: Carmen Linares and María Pagés 2023: Meryl Streep 2024: Joan Manuel Serrat 2025: Graciela Iturbide v t e San Diego Film Critics Society Award for Best Director Joel Coen (1996) James Cameron (1997) John Madden (1998) David Lynch (1999) Cameron Crowe (2000) Terry Zwigoff (2001) Jill Sprecher (2002) Peter Jackson (2003) Clint Eastwood (2004) Bennett Miller (2005) Clint Eastwood (2006) Paul Thomas Anderson (2007) Danny Boyle (2008) Quentin Tarantino (2009) Darren Aronofsky (2010) Nicolas Winding Refn (2011) Ben Affleck (2012) Alfonso Cuarón (2013) Dan Gilroy (2014) George Miller (2015) David Mackenzie (2016) Greta Gerwig (2017) Debra Granik (2018) Benny and Josh Safdie (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Daniel Kwan and Daniel Scheinert (2022) Martin Scorsese (2023) Denis Villeneuve (2024) v t e Seattle Film Critics Society Award for Best Director Barry Jenkins (2016) Christopher Nolan (2017) Alfonso Cuarón (2018) Bong Joon-ho (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Ryusuke Hamaguchi (2021) Daniel Kwan and Daniel Scheinert (2022) Martin Scorsese (2023) Sean Baker (2024) v t e Silver Lion for Best Director Martin Scorsese (1990) Emir Kusturica (1998) Zhang Yuan (1999) Buddhadeb Dasgupta (2000) Babak Payami (2001) Lee Chang-dong (2002) Takeshi Kitano (2003) Kim Ki-duk (2004) Philippe Garrel (2005) Alain Resnais (2006) Brian De Palma (2007) Aleksei Alekseivich German (2008) Shirin Neshat (2009) Álex de la Iglesia (2010) Cai Shangjun (2011) Paul Thomas Anderson (2012) Alexandros Avranas (2013) Andrei Konchalovsky (2014) Pablo Trapero (2015) Amat Escalante / Andrei Konchalovsky (2016) Xavier Legrand (2017) Jacques Audiard (2018) Roy Andersson (2019) Kiyoshi Kurosawa (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Luca Guadagnino (2022) Matteo Garrone (2023) Brady Corbet (2024) v t e St. Louis Film Critics Association Award for Best Director Alexander Payne / Martin Scorsese (2004) Ang Lee (2005) Martin Scorsese (2006) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007) Danny Boyle (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) David Fincher (2010) Michel Hazanavicius (2011) Ben Affleck (2012) Steve McQueen (2013) Alejandro G. Iñárritu (2014) Tom McCarthy (2015) Damien Chazelle (2016) Guillermo del Toro (2017) Spike Lee (2018) Quentin Tarantino (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Sarah Polley (2022) Christopher Nolan (2023) Denis Villeneuve (2024) v t e Toronto Film Critics Association Award for Best Screenplay Screenplay (1999–2022) Paul Thomas Anderson / Charlie Kaufman (1999) Kenneth Lonergan (2000) Christopher Nolan (2001) Charlie and Donald Kaufman (2002) Denys Arcand / Sofia Coppola (2003) Charlie Kaufman (2004) Noah Baumbach (2005) Peter Morgan (2006) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007) Jenny Lumet (2008) Quentin Tarantino / Jason Reitman and Sheldon Turner (2009) Aaron Sorkin (2010) Steven Zaillian and Aaron Sorkin (2011) Paul Thomas Anderson (2012) Spike Jonze (2013) Wes Anderson (2014) Adam McKay and Charles Randolph (2015) Kenneth Lonergan (2016) Jordan Peele (2017) Deborah Davis and Tony McNamara / Paul Schrader (2018) Steven Zaillian (2019) Lee Isaac Chung (2020) Ryusuke Hamaguchi and Takamasa Oe (2021) Martin McDonagh (2022) Original Screenplay (2023–present) Greta Gerwig and Noah Baumbach (2023) Payal Kapadia (2024) Adapted Screenplay (2023–present) Eric Roth and Martin Scorsese (2023) RaMell Ross and Joslyn Barnes (2024) v t e Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association Award for Best Director Spike Jonze / Sam Mendes / Denzel Washington (2002) Peter Jackson (2003) Michel Gondry (2004) Steven Spielberg (2005) Martin Scorsese (2006) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007) Danny Boyle (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) David Fincher (2010) Martin Scorsese (2011) Kathryn Bigelow (2012) Alfonso Cuarón (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) George Miller (2015) Damien Chazelle (2016) Christopher Nolan (2017) Alfonso Cuarón (2018) Bong Joon-ho (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Daniel Kwan and Daniel Scheinert (2022) Christopher Nolan (2023) Brady Corbet (2024) v t e Cannes Film Festival jury presidents 1946–1975 Georges Huisman (1946) Georges Huisman (1947) Georges Huisman (1949) André Maurois (1951) Maurice Genevoix (1952) Jean Cocteau (1953) Jean Cocteau (1954) Marcel Pagnol (1955) Maurice Lehmann (1956) André Maurois (1957) Marcel Achard (1958) Marcel Achard (1959) Georges Simenon (1960) Jean Giono (1961) Tetsurō Furukaki (1962) Armand Salacrou (1963) Fritz Lang (1964) Olivia de Havilland (1965) Sophia Loren (1966) Alessandro Blasetti (1967) André Chamson (1968) Luchino Visconti (1969) Miguel Ángel Asturias (1970) Michèle Morgan (1971) Joseph Losey (1972) Ingrid Bergman (1973) René Clair (1974) Jeanne Moreau (1975) 1976–2000 Tennessee Williams (1976) Roberto Rossellini (1977) Alan J. Pakula (1978) Françoise Sagan (1979) Kirk Douglas (1980) Jacques Deray (1981) Giorgio Strehler (1982) William Styron (1983) Dirk Bogarde (1984) Miloš Forman (1985) Sydney Pollack (1986) Yves Montand (1987) Ettore Scola (1988) Wim Wenders (1989) Bernardo Bertolucci (1990) Roman Polanski (1991) Gérard Depardieu (1992) Louis Malle (1993) Clint Eastwood (1994) Jeanne Moreau (1995) Francis Ford Coppola (1996) Isabelle Adjani (1997) Martin Scorsese (1998) David Cronenberg (1999) Luc Besson (2000) 2001–present Liv Ullmann (2001) David Lynch (2002) Patrice Chéreau (2003) Quentin Tarantino (2004) Emir Kusturica (2005) Wong Kar-wai (2006) Stephen Frears (2007) Sean Penn (2008) Isabelle Huppert (2009) Tim Burton (2010) Robert De Niro (2011) Nanni Moretti (2012) Steven Spielberg (2013) Jane Campion (2014) Joel and Ethan Coen (2015) George Miller (2016) Pedro Almodóvar (2017) Cate Blanchett (2018) Alejandro González Iñárritu (2019) Spike Lee (2021) Vincent Lindon (2022) Ruben Östlund (2023) Greta Gerwig (2024) Juliette Binoche (2025) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz RKD Artists Museum of Modern Art Grammy Awards Emmy Awards FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐x8dhc
Cached time: 20250817051700
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.876 seconds
Real time usage: 4.400 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 23898/1000000
Revision size: 216896/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1655871/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 449060/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 24/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1362660/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.261/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 29438754/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3337.153      1 -total
 50.41% 1682.417      2 Template:Reflist
 23.81%  794.716    147 Template:Cite_web
 10.96%  365.697      1 Template:Navboxes
 10.79%  359.926     55 Template:Cite_news
 10.01%  334.133      1 Template:Infobox_person
  8.33%  277.954     55 Template:Navbox
  5.21%  173.761     19 Template:Pluralize_from_text
  4.38%  146.147      5 Template:Sfn
  3.75%  125.058      1 Template:IPA Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:stable-pcache:18995:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817051700 and revision id 1306329386. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Martin_Scorsese&oldid=1306329386 " Categories : Martin Scorsese 1942 births 20th-century American male actors 20th-century American screenwriters 21st-century American male actors 21st-century American screenwriters AFI Life Achievement Award recipients American documentary film directors American film editors American film historians American film producers American male film actors American male voice actors American male screenwriters American male television actors American television directors American television producers American male television writers American music video directors American recipients of the Legion of Honour American Roman Catholics American writers of Italian descent BAFTA fellows Best Adapted Screenplay BAFTA Award winners Best Directing Academy Award winners Best Director BAFTA Award winners Best Director Golden Globe winners Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Director winners Catholics from New York (state) Cardinal Hayes High School alumni Cecil B. DeMille Award Golden Globe winners César Honorary Award recipients David di Donatello Career Award winners Directors Guild of America Award winners Directors of Best Picture Academy Award winners Directors of Palme d'Or winners Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Film directors from New York City Film theorists Filmmakers who won the Best Film BAFTA Award Golden Lion for Lifetime Achievement recipients Grammy Award winners Italian-American culture in New York City Kennedy Center honorees Living people Mass media theorists Members of the American Philosophical Society Naturalised citizens of Italy New York University faculty People from Corona, Queens Postmodernist filmmakers Primetime Emmy Award winners Scorsese family Screenwriters from New York (state) Tisch School of the Arts alumni Venice Best Director Silver Lion winners Rossellini family Hidden categories: Pages with non-numeric formatnum arguments CS1 French-language sources (fr) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Webarchive template archiveis links CS1: unfit URL CS1 maint: publisher location CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Use American English from January 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from February 2024 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages with Italian IPA Articles containing French-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2023 All articles containing potentially dated statements Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata People appearing on C-SPAN TCMDb name template using non-numeric ID from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 05:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Martin Scorsese 95 languages Add topic

