Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 History 3 Doctrine 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Sautrāntika 24 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Кыргызча Magyar 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Русский संस्कृतम् Slovenčina Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Early Buddhist school Part of a series on Early Buddhism Buddhism Scriptures Early Buddhist Texts (EBT) Tripiṭaka Nikayas Āgamas Gandhāran EBTs Prātimokṣa Abhidharma Jatakas Avadanas Mahāvastu Śālistamba Sūtra Tibetan EBTs in the Kangyur Early sangha Gautama Buddha Sāriputta Mahāmoggallāna Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī Mahakasyapa Ānanda Upāli Mahākātyāyana Devadatta Anāthapiṇḍika Pre-sectarian Buddhism Kingdom of Magadha Ashoka Moggaliputtatissa Buddhist councils Early Buddhist schools Pre-sectarian Buddhism Mahāsāṃghika Ekavyāvahārika Lokottaravāda Gokulika Bahuśrutīya Prajñaptivāda Caitika (Haimavata) Sthaviras Pudgalavada Vātsīputrīya Saṃmitīya Sarvāstivāda (Haimavata) ( Kāśyapīya ) ( Mahīśāsaka ) ( Dharmaguptaka ) Sautrāntika Mulasarvastivada Vaibhāṣika Vibhajyavāda ( Theravāda ) Tambapaṇṇiya ( Theravāda ) ( Kāśyapīya ) ( Mahīśāsaka ) ( Dharmaguptaka ) *This list is a simplification. It is likely that the development of Buddhist schools was not linear.

There are also differences of opinion among scholars.

Terms Nikāya Buddhism Hīnayāna Śrāvakayāna Pratyekabuddhayāna Bodhisattvayāna v t e The Sautrāntika or Sutravadin ( Sanskrit : सौत्रान्तिक , Suttavāda in Pali; Chinese : 經量部\ 說經部 ; pinyin : jīng liàng bù\ shuō jīng bù ; Vietnamese : Kinh lượng bộ, Thuyết chuyển bộ ; Japanese : 経量部 , romanized : Kyōryōbu ) were an early Buddhist school generally believed to be descended from the Sthavira nikāya by way of their immediate parent school, the Sarvāstivādins .

[ 1 ] While they are identified as a unique doctrinal tendency, they were part of the Sarvāstivāda Vinaya lineage of monastic ordination.

[ 2 ] Their name means literally "the conclusions of the sutras " where sūtra is lengthened into the vṛddhi derivative sautra, and combined with the word anta, meaning end or conclusion, with a final nominal marker ika (compare with the term vedānta ), meaning their philosophy is derived from the sūtras.

As stated by the commentator Yasomitra, they hold the sutras , but not the Abhidharma commentaries ( sastras ), as authoritative.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] The views of this group first appear in the Abhidharmakośabhāṣya of Vasubandhu .

[ 2 ] Name [ edit ] The name Sautrāntika indicates that unlike other North Indian Sthaviras , this school held the Buddhist sutras as central to their views, over and above the ideas presented in the Abhidharma literature. The Sarvastivada scholar Samghabhadra, in his Nyayanusara , attacks a school of thought named Sautrantika which he associates with the scholars Śrīlāta and his student Vasubandhu .

[ 4 ] According to Samghabhadra, a central tenet of this school was that all sutra is explicit meaning ( nitartha ), hence their name.

[ 4 ] The Sarvāstivādins sometimes referred to them as the Dārṣṭāntika school, meaning "those who utilize the method of examples".

[ 3 ] This latter name may have been a pejorative label.

[ 5 ] It is also possible that the name 'Dārṣṭāntika' identifies a predecessor tradition, or another related, but distinct, doctrinal position; the exact relationship between the two terms is unclear.

[ 6 ] Charles Willemen identifies the Sautrāntika as a Western branch of the Sarvāstivādins, active in the Gandhara area, who split from the Sarvāstivādins sometime before 200 CE, when the Sautrāntika name emerged.

[ 7 ] Other scholars are less confident of a specific identification for the Sautrāntika; Nobuyoshi Yamabe calls specifying the precise identity of the Sautrāntika "one of the biggest problems in current Buddhist scholarship".

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] The founding of the Sautrāntika school is attributed to the elder Kumāralāta (c. 3rd century CE), [ 8 ] author of a "collection of dṛṣtānta" ( Dṛṣtāntapaṅkti ) called the Kalpanāmaṇḍitīkā . The Sautrāntikas were sometimes also called "disciples of Kumāralāta".

[ 9 ] According to Chinese sources, Harivarman (250-350 CE) was a student of Kumāralāta who became disillusioned with Buddhist Abhidharma and then wrote the Tattvasiddhi -śāstra in order to "eliminate confusion and abandon the later developments, with the hope of returning to the origin".

[ 10 ] The Tattvasiddhi was translated into Chinese and became an important text in Chinese Buddhism until the Tang Dynasty.

Other works by Sautrāntika affiliated authors include the Abhidharmāmṛtarasa-śāstra attributed to Ghoṣaka , and the Abhidharmāvatāra-śāstra attributed to Skandhila .

[ 11 ] The elder Śrīlāta , who was Vasubandhu 's teacher is also known as a famous Sautrāntika who wrote the Sautrāntika-vibhāṣa .

[ 12 ] Ghoṣaka's Abhidharmāmṛtarasa and Harivarman's Tattvasiddhi have both been translated into English.

The Buddhist philosopher Vasubandhu wrote the famous Abhidharma work Abhidharmakośakārikā which presented Sarvāstivāda - Vaibhāṣika Abhidharma tenets, he also wrote a " bhāṣya " or commentary on this work, which presented critiques of the Vaibhāṣika tradition from a Sautrāntika perspective.

[ 13 ] The Abhidharmakośa was highly influential and is the main text on Abhidharma used in Tibetan and Chinese Buddhism up until today.

Buddhist logic ( pramāṇavāda ) as developed by Dignāga and Dharmakīrti is also associated with the Sautrāntika school.

Doctrine [ edit ] Part of a series on Buddhist philosophy Traditions Vibhajyavāda Theravāda Vaibhāṣika Sautrāntika Pudgalavada Prajñaptivāda Lokottaravāda Mahayana Madhyamaka Yogachara Pramāṇavāda Vajrayana Tiāntāi Huayan Zen/Chán Dzogchen Themes Buddhist logico-epistemology Buddhist ethics Buddhism and psychology Buddhist vegetarianism Abhidharma Ahimsa Not-self Interdependent origination Emptiness Karma Middle Way Two truths doctrine Dharma theory Svabhava Buddhist atomism Suffering Buddha-nature Nirvana Buddhist modernism Pre-modern philosophers Moggaliputta-Tissa Katyāyāniputra Nagasena Nagarjuna Aryadeva Harivarman Vasubandhu Saṃghabhadra Asanga Buddhaghosa Buddhadatta Dhammapāla Dignāga Dharmakirti Buddhapālita Bhāviveka Dharmapala of Nalanda Chandrakirti Shantideva Sengzhao Jizang Xuanzang Zhiyi Fazang Guifeng Zongmi Wonhyo Jinul Kūkai Dōgen Jñānagarbha Śāntarakṣita Haribhadra Atiśa Jñanasrimitra Ratnakīrti Ratnākaraśānti Abhayakaragupta Sakya Pandita Rongzom Acariya Anuruddha Dolpopa Je Tsongkhapa Longchenpa Gorampa Sakya Chokden Mikyö Dorje Modern philosophers Anagarika Dharmapala Ledi Sayadaw B. R. Ambedkar Taixu Yin Shun Kitaro Nishida Keiji Nishitani Hajime Tanabe Masao Abe D. T. Suzuki Mahasi Sayadaw K. N. Jayatilleke David Kalupahana Ñāṇananda Buddhadasa P. A. Payutto Thích Nhất Hạnh Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo Jamgon Kongtrul Ju Mipham Gendün Chöphel 14th Dalai Lama Religion portal Philosophy portal v t e No separate vinaya (monastic code) specific to the Sautrāntika has been found, nor is the existence of any such separate disciplinary code evidenced in other texts; this indicates that they were likely only a doctrinal division within the Sarvāstivādin school.

[ 5 ] The Sautrāntika criticized the Sarvāstivādins on various matters such as ontology , philosophy of mind and perception .

[ 5 ] [ 14 ] While the Sarvāstivādin abhidharma described a complex system in which past, present, and future phenomena are all held to have some form of their own existence, the Sautrāntika subscribed to a doctrine of "extreme momentariness" that held that only the present moment existed .

[ 5 ] They seem to have regarded the Sarvāstivādin position as a violation of the basic Buddhist principle of impermanence .

[ 5 ] As explained by Jan Westerhoff, this doctrine of momentariness holds that each present moment "does not possess any temporal thickness; immediately after coming into existence each moment passes out of existence" and that therefore "all dharmas, whether mental or material, only last for an instant (ksana) and cease immediately after arising".

[ 15 ] The Sarvāstivādin abhidharma also broke down human experience in terms of a variety of underlying phenomena (a view similar to that held by the modern Theravadin abhidhamma); the Sautrāntika believed that experience could not be differentiated in this manner.

[ 5 ] Sautrantika doctrines expounded by elder Śrīlāta and critiqued in turn by Samghabhadra's Nyayanusara include: [ 16 ] The theory of anudhatu (or * purvanudhatu , "subsidiary element"), which is also associated with the theory of seeds ( Bīja ) espoused by Vasubandhu.

[ 17 ] This theory was used to explain karma and rebirth .

The doctrine that caitasikas (mental factors) are but modes of citta (mind) and are not separate elemental dharmas which come together in "association" ( samprayoga ) as the Vaibhāṣika believed. This view is also expoused at length in Harivarman's Tattvasiddhi.

[ 18 ] The doctrine that the sense-elements ( dhatu ) alone are real existents, not the aggregates ( skandha ) or sense spheres ( ayatana ).

A process of direct perception ( pratyaksha ) which differed from the direct realism of the Vaibhāṣika, and instead posited a form of indirect representationalism .

[ 19 ] According to Vasubandhu , the Sautrāntika also held the view that there may be many Buddhas simultaneously, otherwise known as the doctrine of contemporaneous Buddhas.

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Schools of Buddhism Nikaya Buddhism References [ edit ] ^ a b Westerhoff, Jan, The Golden Age of Indian Buddhist Philosophy, Oxford University Press, 2018, p. 73.

^ a b Tadeusz Skorupski, Sautrāntika, Oxford Bibliographies, LAST MODIFIED: 29 MAY 2015, DOI: 10.1093/OBO/9780195393521-0210 ^ a b Williams & Tribe 2000 , p. 118.

^ a b Dessein, Bart; Teng, Weijen. Text, History, and Philosophy: Abhidharma across Buddhist Scholastic Traditions, BRILL, 2016, pg 232 ^ a b c d e f Buswell 2003 , p. 505.

^ a b Buswell 2003 , p. 177.

^ Buswell 2003 , p. 220.

^ "Kumārata" .

Nichiren Buddhism Library . Retrieved 2019-05-09 .

^ Przyluski, Jean (1940). "Darstantika, Sautrantika and Sarvastivaldin".

The Indian Historical Quarterly .

6 : 246– 54.

^ Lin, Qian.

Mind in Dispute: The Section on Mind in Harivarman’s *Tattvasiddhi , University of Washington, page 15-16 ^ Charles Willemen, Bart Dessein, Collett Cox (editors) Sarvastivada Buddhist Scholasticism , Handbuch Der Orientalistik , page 108.

^ Przyluski, Jean; Darstantika, Sautrantika and Sarvastivaldin. The Indian Historical Quarterly 1940, 6 pp.246--254 ^ Buswell 2003 , p. 878.

^ Williams, Paul (editor). Buddhism: Yogācāra, the epistemological tradition and Tathāgatagarbha, Volume 5, page 48.

^ Westerhoff, Jan, The Golden Age of Indian Buddhist Philosophy, Oxford University Press, 2018, p. 75.

^ Dessein, Bart; Teng, Weijen. Text, History, and Philosophy: Abhidharma across Buddhist Scholastic Traditions, BRILL, 2016, pg 231 ^ Fukuda, Takumi. BHADANTA RAMA: A SAUTRANTIKA BEFORE VASUBANDHU, Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, Volume 26 Number 2 2003.

^ Lin, Qian.

Mind in Dispute: The Section on Mind in Harivarman’s *Tattvasiddhi , University of Washington, page 10 ^ Ronkin, Noa, "Abhidharma", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2014 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = < http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2014/entries/abhidharma/ > ^ Xing 2005 , p. 67.

Bibliography [ edit ] Buswell, Robert Jr.

(2003).

Encyclopedia of Buddhism . Macmillan USA.

ISBN 978-0-02-865718-9 .

Williams, Paul ; Tribe, Anthony (2000).

Buddhist Thought: A Complete Introduction to the Indian Tradition . Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-20700-2 .

Xing, Guang (2005).

The Concept of the Buddha: Its Evolution from Early Buddhism to the Trikāya Theory . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-0-415-33344-3 .

External links [ edit ] "Sautrāntika Theory of Perception [Part 14]" .

www.wisdomlib.org . 28 March 2017.

"Sautrāntika theory of Inference [Part 15]" .

www.wisdomlib.org . 28 March 2017.

v t e Topics in Buddhism Outline Glossary Index Foundations Four Noble Truths Three Jewels Buddha Dharma Sangha Noble Eightfold Path Nirvana Middle Way The Buddha Tathāgata Birthday Four sights Eight Great Events Great Renunciation Physical characteristics Life of Buddha in art Footprint Relics Iconography in Laos and Thailand Films Miracles Family Suddhodāna (father) Māyā (mother) Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother) Yaśodharā (wife) Rāhula (son) Ānanda (cousin) Devadatta (cousin) Bodhi tree Places where the Buddha stayed Buddha in world religions Bodhisattvas Avalokiteśvara Guanyin Mañjuśrī Mahāsthāmaprāpta Ākāśagarbha Kṣitigarbha Samantabhadra Vajrapāṇi Skanda Tārā Metteyya/Maitreya Disciples Kaundinya Assaji Sāriputta Mahamoggallāna Ānanda Mahākassapa Aṅgulimāla Anuruddha Mahākaccana Nanda Subhūti Puṇṇa Mantānīputta Upāli Mahapajapati Gotamī Khema Uppalavanna Asita Channa Yasa Key concepts Avidyā (Ignorance) Bardo Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Dhamma theory Dharma Enlightenment Five hindrances Indriya Karma Kleshas Mental factors Mindstream Parinirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Rebirth Saṃsāra Saṅkhāra Skandha Śūnyatā Taṇhā (Craving) Tathātā Ten Fetters Three marks of existence Anicca Dukkha Anattā Two truths doctrine Cosmology Ten spiritual realms Six Paths Deva realm Human realm Asura realm Hungry Ghost realm Animal realm Naraka Three planes of existence Branches Mahayana Zen Chinese Chan Japanese Zen Korean Seon Vietnamese Thiền Pure Land Tiantai Huayan Risshū Nichiren Madhyamaka Yogachara Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhism Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Shingon Dzogchen Theravada Southern Esoteric Buddhism Navayana Early Buddhist schools Pre-sectarian Buddhism Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna Southern, Eastern and Northern Buddhism Practices Bhavana Bodhipakkhiyādhammā Brahmavihara Mettā Karuṇā Mudita Upekkha Buddhābhiṣeka Dāna Devotion Deity yoga Dhyāna Faith Five Strengths Iddhipada Meditation Mantras Kammaṭṭhāna Recollection Smarana Anapanasati Samatha-vipassanā ( Vipassana movement ) Shikantaza Zazen Tukdam Koan Ganana Mandala Tonglen Tantra Tertön Terma Merit Mindfulness Mindful Yoga Satipatthana Nekkhamma Nianfo Pāramitā Paritta Puja Offerings Prostration Music Refuge Sādhu Satya Sacca Seven Factors of Enlightenment Sati Dhamma vicaya Pīti Passaddhi Śīla Five precepts Eight precepts Bodhisattva vow Pratimokṣa Threefold Training Śīla Samadhi Prajñā Vīrya Four Right Exertions Twenty-two vows of Ambedkar Yujia Yankou Shuilu Fahui Nirvana Bodhi Bodhisattva Buddhahood Pratyekabuddhayāna Four stages of awakening Sotāpanna Sakadagami Anāgāmi Arhat Monasticism Bhikkhu Bhikkhunī Śrāmaṇera Śrāmaṇerī Anagārika Ajahn Sayadaw Zen master Rōshi Lama Rinpoche Geshe Tulku Western tulku Kappiya Donchee Householder Upāsaka and Upāsikā Achar Śrāvaka Ten principal disciples Shaolin Monastery Major figures The Buddha Nagasena Aśvaghoṣa Nagarjuna Asanga Vasubandhu Kumārajīva Buddhaghosa Buddhapālita Dignāga Bodhidharma Zhiyi Emperor Wen of Sui Songtsen Gampo Xuanzang Shandao Padmasambhava Saraha Atiśa Naropa Karmapa Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Shamarpa Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Ajahn Mun B. R. Ambedkar Ajahn Chah Thích Nhất Hạnh Texts Early Buddhist texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana sutras Pali Canon Chinese Buddhist canon Tibetan Buddhist canon Dhammapada Sutra Vinaya Madhyamakālaṃkāra Abhidharmadīpa Countries Afghanistan Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bhutan Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Canada China Costa Rica Croatia Czech Republic Denmark England Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Korea Kyrgyzstan Laos Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Maldives Malaysia Mexico Middle East Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Scotland Senegal Singapore Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Tibet Ukraine United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela Vietnam Wales Zimbabwe History Timeline Ashoka Kanishka Buddhist councils History of Buddhism in India Decline of Buddhism in India Huichang persecution of Buddhism Greco-Buddhism Gandharan Buddhism Texts Menander I Buddhism and the Roman world Buddhism in the West Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Persecution of Buddhists In Afghanistan In Vietnam Rimé movement Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal Dalit Buddhist movement Chinese invasion of Tibet 1959 Tibetan uprising Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist modernism Vipassana movement 969 Movement Engaged Buddhism Women in Buddhism Philosophy Abhidharma Atomism Buddhology Creator Buddhism and democracy Economics Eight Consciousnesses Engaged Buddhism Eschatology Ethics Evolution Humanism Logic Reality Secular Buddhism Socialism The unanswerable questions Culture Architecture Temple Vihāra Kyaung Wat Ordination hall Stupa Pagoda Burmese pagoda Candi Dzong architecture List of Buddhist architecture in China Japanese Buddhist architecture Buddhist temples in Korea Thai temple art and architecture Tibetan Buddhist architecture Art Greco-Buddhist Budai Buddha in art Calendar Cuisine Funeral Holidays Vesak Uposatha Māgha Pūjā Asalha Puja Vassa Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Kasaya Mahabodhi Temple Mantra Om mani padme hum Mudra Music Pilgrimage Lumbini Maya Devi Temple Bodh Gaya Sarnath Kushinagar Poetry Prayer beads Hama yumi Prayer wheel Symbolism Dharmachakra Flag Bhavacakra Swastika Thangka Temple of the Tooth Vegetarianism Miscellaneous Abhijñā Amitābha Brahmā Dharma talk Hinayana Iddhi Kalpa Koliya Lineage Māra Siddhi Sacred languages Pāḷi Sanskrit Comparison Baháʼí Faith Christianity Influences Comparison East Asian religions Gnosticism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Psychology Science Theosophy Violence Western philosophy Lists Bodhisattvas Buddhas Buddhists American Korean Indian Suttas Sutras Temples Festivals Category Buddhism portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐kvdkw
Cached time: 20250814230638
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.654 seconds
Real time usage: 0.833 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2172/1000000
Revision size: 11357/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 113569/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3584/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 11/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 61654/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.401/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15119554/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  650.098      1 -total
 21.83%  141.895      3 Template:Langx
 21.45%  139.453      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 19.16%  124.583      1 Template:Early_Buddhism
 18.39%  119.565      1 Template:Reflist
 16.19%  105.267      3 Template:Cite_web
 13.93%   90.528      1 Template:Short_description
  8.21%   53.363     13 Template:Sfn
  7.79%   50.628      1 Template:Buddhism_topics
  7.64%   49.640      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:599641:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814230638 and revision id 1268150205. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sautrāntika&oldid=1268150205 " Categories : Nikaya schools Sthaviravāda Yogacara Early Buddhist schools Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Vietnamese-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text This page was last edited on 8 January 2025, at 10:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sautrāntika 24 languages Add topic

