Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In classical conflict theory 2 Modern approaches 3 Types 4 Criticism 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Conflict theories 24 languages العربية Български Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia עברית Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Perspectives in sociology and political philosophy For a historiographical theory with a similar name, see Conflict thesis .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Conflict theories" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Sociology History Outline Index Key themes Society Globalization Human behavior Human environmental impact Identity Industrial revolutions 3 / 4 / 5 Popularity Social complexity Social environment Social equality Social equity Social power Social stratification Social structure Social cycle theory Perspectives Conflict theory Critical theory Structural functionalism Positivism Social constructionism Social darwinism Symbolic interactionism Branches Aging Architecture Art Astrosociology Body Criminology Consciousness Culture Death Demography Deviance Disaster Economic Education Emotion ( Jealousy ) Environmental Family Feminist Fiscal Food Gender Generations Health Historical Immigration Industrial Internet Jewry Knowledge Language Law Leisure Literature Marxist Mathematic Medical Military Music Peace, war, and social conflict Philosophy Political Public Punishment Race and ethnicity Religion Rural Science ( History of science ) Social movements Social psychology Sociocybernetics Sociology Space Sport Technology Terrorism Urban Utopian Victimology Visual Methods Quantitative Qualitative Comparative Computational Ethnographic Conversation analysis Historical Interview Mathematical Network analysis Social experiment Survey Major theorists 1700s: Comte · Sieyès 1800s: Martineau · Tocqueville · Marx · Spencer · Le Bon · Ward · Pareto · Tönnies · Veblen · Simmel · Durkheim · Addams · Mead · Weber · Du Bois · Mannheim · Elias 1900s: Fromm · Adorno · Gehlen · Aron · Merton · Nisbet · Mills · Bell · Schoeck · Goffman · Bauman · Foucault · Luhmann · Habermas · Baudrillard · Bourdieu · Giddens Lists Bibliography Terminology Journals Organizations People Timeline By country Society portal v t e Conflict resolution Principles Democracy Might makes right Non-aggression Nonviolence Pacifism Rule of man Speaking truth to power Toleration paradox Law Collaborative Dispute resolution Right to an effective remedy Rule of law Management Arbitration Alternative dispute resolution Auction Conciliation Family therapy Mediation Party-directed Negotiation Nonviolent Communication Peacebuilding International relations Appeasement Armistice Ceasefire Diplomacy Multilateralism Peacebuilding Peacemaking Peace process Peace treaty Track II diplomacy War Models and theories Brinkmanship Conflict escalation Conflict avoidance Conflict continuum Conflict style inventory Deterrence theory Game theory Prisoner's dilemma v t e Conflict theories are perspectives in political philosophy and sociology which argue that individuals and groups ( social classes ) within society interact on the basis of conflict rather than agreement, while also emphasizing social psychology , historical materialism , power dynamics , and their roles in creating power structures, social movements , and social arrangements within a society.

Conflict theories often draw attention to power differentials, such as class conflict , or a conflict continuum . Power generally contrasts historically dominant ideologies, economies, currencies or technologies. Accordingly, conflict theories represent attempts at the macro-level analysis of society .

Many political philosophers and sociologists have been framed as having conflict theories, dating back as far as Plato's idea of the tripartite soul of The Republic , [ 1 ] to Hobbes' ideas in The Leviathan . Other historical political philosophers associated with having "conflict theories" include Jean Bodin , Adam Smith , John Stuart Mill , Thomas Robert Malthus , Karl Marx , and Georg Simmel .

[ 2 ] Georg Simmel was one of the earliest sociologists to formally use "conflict" as a framework to understand social change, writing about the topic in his 1908 book, "Conflict and the Web of Group Affiliations".

[ 3 ] While many conflict theories set out to highlight the ideological aspects inherent in traditional thought, conflict theory does not refer to a unified school of thought, and should not be confused with, for instance, social conflict theory , or any other specific theory related to social conflict .

In classical conflict theory [ edit ] Two early conflict theorists were the Polish-Austrian sociologist and political theorist Ludwig Gumplowicz (1838–1909) and the American sociologist and paleontologist Lester F. Ward (1841–1913). Although Ward and Gumplowicz developed their theories independently they had much in common and approached conflict from a comprehensive anthropological and evolutionary point-of-view as opposed to Marx's rather exclusive focus on economic factors.

Gumplowicz, in Grundriss der Soziologie ( Outlines of Sociology , 1884), describes how civilization has been shaped by conflict between cultures and ethnic groups. Gumplowicz theorized that large complex human societies evolved from war and conquest. The winner of a war would enslave the losers; eventually a complex caste system develops.

[ 4 ] Horowitz says that Gumplowicz understood conflict in all its forms: "class conflict, race conflict, and ethnic conflict", and calls him one of the fathers of conflict theory.

[ 5 ] What happened in India, Babylon , Egypt, Greece, and Rome may sometimes happen in modern Europe. European civilization may perish, over flooded by barbaric tribes. But if anyone believes that we are safe from such catastrophes he is perhaps yielding to an all too optimistic delusion. There are no barbaric tribes in our neighborhood to be sure — but let no one is deceived, their instincts lie latent in the populace of European states.

— Gumplowicz (1884), [ 6 ] Conflict theories were popular in early sociology, and accordingly often date back to the early 1900s founders of Sociology, and particularly the ideas of Max Weber , Georg Simmel , Karl Marx , and Lester Frank Ward .

Émile Durkheim (1858–1917) opposed conflict theory views and instead saw society as a functioning organism . His primary lens of functionalism concerns "the effort to impute, as rigorously as possible, to each feature, custom, or practice, its effect on the functioning of a supposedly stable, cohesive system," [ 7 ] Seeing social conflict as a devation that appeared in society as crime .  Durkheim saw crime as "a factor in public health, an integral part of all healthy societies." [ 8 ] The collective conscience defines certain acts as "criminal." Crime thus plays a role in the evolution of morality and law: "[it] implies not only that the way remains open to necessary changes but that in certain cases it directly prepares these changes." [ 9 ] Max Weber 's (1864–1920) approach to conflict is contrasted with that of Marx. While Marx focused on the way individual behavior is conditioned by social structure , Weber emphasized the importance of " social action ," i.e., the ability of individuals to affect their social relationships.

[ 10 ] Karl Marx (1818–1883) based his conflict theory on a dialectical materialist account of history, Marxism posited that capitalism , like previous socioeconomic systems, would inevitably produce internal tensions leading to its own destruction. Marx ushered in radical change, advocating proletarian revolution and freedom from the ruling classes , as well as critiqued political economy .  At the same time, Karl Marx was aware that most of the people living in capitalist societies did not see how the system shaped the entire operation of society. Just as modern individuals see private property (and the right to pass that property on to their children) as natural, many of the members in capitalistic societies see the rich as having earned their wealth through hard work and education, while seeing the poor as lacking in skill and initiative. Marx rejected this type of thinking, viewing it as something Friedrich Engels termed false consciousness , the use of misdirection by the ruling class to obfuscate the exploitation intrinsic to the relationship between the proletariat and the ruling class. Marx wanted to replace this false consciousness with something Friedrich Engels termed class consciousness , the workers' recognition of themselves as a class unified in opposition to capitalists and ultimately to the capitalist system itself.  In general, Marx wanted the proletarians to rise up against the capitalists and overthrow the capitalist system.

The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles.
Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord and serf, guild-master and journeyman, in a word, oppressor and oppressed, stood in constant opposition to one another, carried on an uninterrupted, now hidden, now open fight, a fight that each time ended, either in a revolutionary reconstitution of society at large or in the common ruin of the contending classes.

— Karl Marx & Friedrich Engels The Communist Manifesto 1848, [ 11 ] Lester Frank Ward directly attacked and attempted to systematically refute the elite business class' laissez-faire philosophy as espoused by the hugely popular social philosopher Herbert Spencer . Ward's Dynamic Sociology (1883) was an extended thesis on how to reduce conflict and competition in society and thus optimize human progress. At the most basic level, Ward saw human nature itself to be deeply conflicted between self- aggrandizement and altruism , between emotion and intellect, and between male and female. These conflicts would be then reflected in society and Ward assumed there had been a "perpetual and vigorous struggle" among various "social forces" that shaped civilization.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Ward was more optimistic than Marx and Gumplowicz and believed that it was possible to build on and reform present social structures with the help of sociological analysis .

Modern approaches [ edit ] C. Wright Mills has been called the founder of modern conflict theory .

[ 14 ] In Mills's view, social structures are created through conflict between people with differing interests and resources. Individuals and resources, in turn, are influenced by these structures and by the "unequal distribution of power and resources in the society." [ 14 ] The power elite of American society, (i.e., the military–industrial complex ) had "emerged from the fusion of the corporate elite , the Pentagon , and the executive branch of government." Mills argued that the interests of this elite were opposed to those of the people. He theorized that the policies of the power elite would result in "increased escalation of conflict, production of weapons of mass destruction , and possibly the annihilation of the human race." [ 14 ] Gene Sharp (1928-2018) was a professor emeritus of political science at the University of Massachusetts Dartmouth .

[ 15 ] He is known for his extensive writings on nonviolent struggle , which have influenced numerous anti-government resistance movements around the world. In 1983 he founded the Albert Einstein Institution , a non-profit organization devoted to studies and promotion of the use of nonviolent action in conflicts worldwide.

[ 16 ] Sharp's key theme is that power is not monolithic; that is, it does not derive from some intrinsic quality of those who are in power. For Sharp, political power, the power of any state—regardless of its particular structural organization—ultimately derives from the subjects of the state. His fundamental belief is that any power structure relies upon the subjects' obedience to the orders of the ruler or rulers. If subjects do not obey, leaders have no power. Sharp has been called both the "Machiavelli of nonviolence" and the "Clausewitz of nonviolent warfare." [ 17 ] Sharp's scholarship has influenced resistance organizations around the world. More recently, the protest movement that toppled President Mubarak of Egypt drew extensively on his ideas, as well as the youth movement in Tunisia , and the earlier ones in the Eastern European colour revolutions that had previously been inspired by Sharp's work.

[ 18 ] A recent articulation of conflict theory is found in Canadian sociologist Alan Sears' book A Good Book, in Theory: A Guide to Theoretical Thinking (2008): [ 19 ] Societies are defined by inequality that produces conflict, rather than which produces order and consensus. This conflict based on inequality can only be overcome through a fundamental transformation of the existing relations in the society, and is productive of new social relations.

The disadvantaged have structural interests that run counter to the status quo , which, once they are assumed, will lead to social change. Thus, they are viewed as agents of change rather than objects one should feel sympathy for.

Human potential (e.g., capacity for creativity) is suppressed by conditions of exploitation and oppression, which are necessary in any society with an unequal division of labour. These and other qualities do not necessarily have to be stunted due to the requirements of the so-called " civilizing process ," or " functional necessity ": creativity is actually an engine for economic development and change.

The role of theory is in realizing human potential and transforming society, rather than maintaining the power structure. The opposite aim of theory would be the objectivity and detachment associated with positivism , where theory is a neutral, explanatory tool.

Consensus is a euphemism for ideology . Genuine consensus is not achieved, rather the more powerful in societies are able to impose their conceptions on others and have them accept their discourses . Consensus does not preserve social order, it entrenches stratification, a tool of the current social order.

The State serves the particular interests of the most powerful while claiming to represent the interests of all. Representation of disadvantaged groups in State processes may cultivate the notion of full participation, but this is an illusion/ideology.

Inequality on a global level is characterized by the purposeful underdevelopment of Third World countries, both during colonization and after national independence. The global system (i.e., development agencies such as World Bank and International Monetary Fund ) benefits the most powerful countries and multi-national corporations, rather than the subjects of development, through economic, political, and military actions.

Although Sears associates the conflict theory approach with Marxism , he argues that it is the foundation for much " feminist , post-modernist , anti-racist , and lesbian-gay liberationist theories." [ 20 ] Conflict theory has three assumptions: [ 21 ] Humans are self-interested.

Societies operate under perpetual scarcity of resources.

Conflict is pervasive and unavoidable within social groups and between social groups.

Types [ edit ] Conflict theory is most commonly associated with Marxism, but as a reaction to functionalism and the positivist method, it may also be associated with a number of other perspectives, including: Critical theory Feminist theory :  An approach that recognizes women's political, social, and economic equality to men.

Postmodern theory : An approach that is critical of modernism, with a mistrust of grand theories and ideologies.

[ 22 ] Post-structural theory Postcolonial theory Queer theory : A growing body of research findings that challenges the heterosexual bias in Western society.

[ 22 ] World systems theory Race-conflict approach : A point of view that focuses on inequality and conflict between people of different racial and ethnic categories.

[ 22 ] Critical realism (philosophy of the social sciences) Criticism [ edit ] Conflict theory has been criticised for being too politicised by its association with Marx and its widespread use by advocates in numerous causes and movements. Critics also argue it downplays unity in society while taking a negative view of society.

[ 23 ] See also [ edit ] Society portal Psychology portal Conflict management Game theory One-upmanship Pure sociology Redlining Security dilemma Social defeat Sociology of peace, war, and social conflict Socionics Notes [ edit ] ^ Brown, Eric (2017).

"Plato's Ethics and Politics in The Republic" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 14 September 2023 .

^ Turner, J. H. (1 June 1975).

"Marx and Simmel Revisited: Reassessing the Foundations of Conflict Theory" .

Social Forces .

53 (4): 618– 627.

doi : 10.1093/sf/53.4.618 . Retrieved 14 September 2023 .

^ Simmel, Georg; Hughes, Everett C.; Simmel, Georg (1964).

Conflict (First Free Press paperback ed.). New York: The Free Press.

ISBN 0029288401 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Fifty Key Sociologists: The Formative Theorists, John Scott Irving, 2007, pg 59 ^ "Communicating Ideas: The Politics of Scholarly Publishing", Irving Louis Horowitz, 1986, pg 281 ^ "Outlines of Sociology", pg 196 ^ Bourricaud, F. 'The Sociology of Talcott Parsons' Chicago University Press.

ISBN 0-226-06756-4 . p. 94 ^ Durkheim, E. (1938).

The Rules of Sociological Method.

Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. p. 67.

^ Durkheim, (1938), pp. 70–81.

^ Livesay, C.

Social Inequality: Theories: Weber . Sociology Central. A-Level Sociology Teaching Notes. Retrieved on: 2010-06-20.

^ Marx and Engels, The Communist Manifesto , introduction by Martin Malia (New York: Penguin Group, 1998), pg. 12-13 ISBN 0-451-52710-0 ^ "Transforming Leadership",  James MacGregor Burns, 2004, pg 189 ^ "German Realpolitik and American Sociology: an Inquiry Into the Sources and Political Significance of the Sociology of Conflict", James Alfred Aho, 1975, ch. 6 'Lester F. Ward's Sociology of Conflict' ^ a b c Knapp, P. (1994).

One World – Many Worlds: Contemporary Sociological Theory (2nd Ed.). Harpercollins College Div, pp. 228–246.

Online summary ISBN 978-0-06-501218-7 ^ "Gene Sharp: Author of the nonviolent revolution rulebook" .

BBC News . 21 February 2011.

^ Gene Sharp biography at Albert Einstein Institution web site.

Archived 12 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ Weber, Thomas (2004).

Gandhi as Disciple and Mentor . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780511264184 .

[ page needed ] ^ "Shy U.S. Intellectual Created Playbook Used in a Revolution" .

The New York Times . 16 February 2011.

^ Sears, Alan. (2008) A Good Book, In Theory: A Guide to Theoretical Thinking.

North York: Higher Education University of Toronto Press, pg. 34-6, ISBN 1-55111-536-0 .

^ Sears, pg. 36.

^ Hamon, Raeann R. "Conflict Theory." Encyclopedia of Family Studies (2016): 1-5.

^ a b c Macionis, J., and Gerber, L. (2010). Sociology, 7th edition ^ Stolley, Kathy S. (2005).

The Basics of Sociology . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 27.

References [ edit ] Library resources about Conflict theories Resources in your library Stark, Rodney (2007).

Sociology (10th ed.). Thomson Higher Education.

ISBN 978-0-495-09344-2 .

Lenski, Gerhard E. (1966).

Power and Privilege: A Theory of Social Stratificaion . McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 978-0-07-037165-1 .

Collins, Randall (1994).

Four Sociological Traditions: Selected Readings . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-508702-4 .

Thio, Alex (2008).

Sociology: A Brief Introduction (7th ed.). Pearson.

ISBN 978-0-205-40785-9 .

External links [ edit ] Theory of cooperation v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐zmpkm
Cached time: 20250814220300
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.587 seconds
Real time usage: 0.750 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3095/1000000
Revision size: 20064/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 102735/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5347/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 81633/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.347/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23611018/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  596.185      1 -total
 22.77%  135.760      1 Template:Reflist
 13.40%   79.891      1 Template:Sociology
 13.10%   78.087      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 13.08%   77.969      1 Template:Wikt-lang
 10.43%   62.188      1 Template:Cite_web
  9.73%   57.996      1 Template:Political_philosophy
  9.09%   54.221      1 Template:Short_description
  8.08%   48.147      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  7.49%   44.635      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:266956:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220300 and revision id 1296588521. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conflict_theories&oldid=1296588521 " Categories : Conflict theory Social change Sociological theories Theories of history Identity politics Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2011 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2023 All articles needing additional references Use Oxford spelling from August 2016 Use dmy dates from August 2016 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 20 June 2025, at 23:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Conflict theories 24 languages Add topic

