Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins Toggle Origins subsection 1.1 Xue Muqiao's theory of the "immature socialist system" 1.2 Su Shaozhi's theory of "undeveloped socialism" 1.2.1 Formulating the theory of a primary stage of socialism 1.3 Further developments 2 Effect on party ideology Toggle Effect on party ideology subsection 2.1 Changing views on capitalism 2.2 Historical materialism: universal law or methodology 2.3 The role of Marxism 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Citations 4.2 Sources Toggle the table of contents Primary stage of socialism 5 languages Español Italiano Norsk bokmål Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sub-theory of Chinese Marxist thought This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( November 2017 ) Politics of China Leadership Leadership generations Succession of power Hu–Wen Administration (2002–2012) Xi–Li Administration (2012–2017) Xi's general secretaryship (since 2012) 4th Leadership Core : Xi Jinping 20th Party Politburo : Xi Jinping 14th State Council : Li Qiang Current state leaders Current provincial leaders Party and state leaders Orders of precedence Paramount leader : Xi Jinping First lady : Peng Liyuan Communist Party leader : Xi Jinping State representative : Xi Jinping Head of government : Li Qiang Congress Chairman : Zhao Leji Conference Chairman : Wang Huning Commander-in-chief : Xi Jinping Politburo Standing Committee longest-serving members Related systems Unified power Democratic centralism Collective leadership Organization Department Elections Civil service Constitution Law Constitution Previous constitutions 1954 1975 1978 "People's democratic dictatorship" (Article 1) Democratic centralism (Article 3) Constitutional oath of office (Article 27) Protection of human rights (Article 33) Freedom of religion (Article 36) Highest state organ of power (Article 57) Chinese legal system Civil law tradition Socialist law tradition Laws Legislation Law List of statutes General Principles of the Civil Law (to 2020) Civil Code (from 2021) Marriage Law Labour law Labour Law Labour Contract Law Property law Property Law Intellectual property law Patent law Administrative law Administrative Procedure Law Criminal law Capital punishment Capital offences Death sentence with reprieve Communist Party History Principal leaders Constitution and ideology Admission Oath (Article 6) Socialism with Chinese characteristics Communism Marxism–Leninism Mao Zedong Thought Deng Xiaoping Theory Primary stage of socialism Four Cardinal Principles Three Represents Scientific Outlook on Development Harmonious Socialist Society Xi Jinping Thought Chinese Dream Democracy Whole-process people's democracy Organization National Party Congress ( 20th ) Central Committee ( 20th ) General Secretary ( list ) Xi Jinping Central Politburo ( 20th ) Standing Committee ( 20th ) Central Secretariat ( 20th ) First-ranked secretary: Cai Qi Central Military Commission Chairman : Xi Jinping Vice Chairmen : Zhang Youxia , He Weidong National Security Commission Chairman: Xi Jinping Vice-Chairman: Li Qiang , Zhao Leji , Cai Qi Office Chief: Cai Qi Comprehensively Deepening Reforms Commission Director: Xi Jinping Deputy Directors: Li Qiang , Wang Huning , Cai Qi Secretary-General: Wang Huning Financial & Economic Affairs Commission Director: Xi Jinping Deputy Director: Li Qiang Office Chief: He Lifeng General Office Director : Cai Qi Office of the General Secretary Director: Han Shiming Central Guard Bureau Central Guard Unit Office of the Central Secrecy Commission Organization Department Head : Shi Taifeng Central Commission for Discipline Inspection ( 20th ) Standing Committee ( 20th ) Secretary : Li Xi Commission for Discipline Inspection of the Central Military Commission Secretary: Zhang Shengmin Central Leading Group for Inspection Work Leader: Li Xi Provincial committee Standing committee Secretary Deputy secretaries Party group National People's Congress ( 14th ) Elections Democracy System of people's congress Standing Committee ( 14th ) Council of Chairpersons Chairman : Zhao Leji Vice-Chairpersons Top-ranked: Li Hongzhong Secretary-General : Liu Qi Special Committees Ethnic Affairs Constitution and Law Supervisory and Judicial Affairs Financial and Economic Affairs Education, Science, Culture and Public Health Foreign Affairs Overseas Chinese Affairs Environmental Protection and Resources Conservation Agriculture and Rural Affairs Social Development Affairs Presidium State representative President ( list ): Xi Jinping Presidential Office Chief: Han Shiming Vice President : Han Zheng Executive organ State Council (Central People's Government) Li Qiang Cabinet Premier ( list ): Li Qiang Vice-Premiers ( list ) Ding Xuexiang He Lifeng Zhang Guoqing Liu Guozhong State Councilors Wang Xiaohong Wu Zhenglong Shen Yiqin Secretary-General : Wu Zhenglong Cabinet-level departments National Development & Reform Commission Central bank National Audit Office General Office Secretary-General Deputy Secretaries-General State-owned Assets Supervision & Administration Commission most Central Enterprises Military organ Central Military Commission (CMC) Chairman ( supreme commander ): Xi Jinping Vice Chairmen : Zhang Youxia He Weidong Members: Liu Zhenli Miao Hua Zhang Shengmin Departments: General Office Director: Zhong Shaojun Joint Staff Dept.

Chief : Liu Zhenli Political Work Dept.

Director: Miao Hua Logistic Support Dept.

Director: Zhang Lin Equipment Development Dept.

Director: Xu Xueqiang Training and Administration Dept.

Director: Wang Peng National Defense Mobilization Dept.

Director: Liu Faqing Discipline Inspection Commission Secretary: Zhang Shengmin Politics and Legal Affairs Commission Science and Technology Commission Strategic Planning Office Reform & Organizational Structure Office Int'l Military Cooperation Office Audit Office Offices Administration Agency National armed forces: People's Liberation Army Theater commands People's Armed Police 1st Mobile Contingent 2nd Mobile Contingent China Coast Guard Militia State Council National Defense Mobilization Commission Chairman : Li Qiang Ministry of National Defense Minister : Dong Jun Ministry of Veterans Affairs State Administration for Sci., Tech. & Industry for National Defense Military history Armed conflicts Military modernization Military reform since 2015 CMC Leading Group for Military Reform Leader: Xi Jinping Supervisory organ National Supervisory Commission Director : Liu Jinguo Corruption in China Anti-corruption campaign since 2012 Independent Commission Against Corruption (Hong Kong) Commission Against Corruption (Macau) Judicial organs Supreme People's Court President : Zhang Jun People's Courts Judicial Police Supreme People's Procuratorate Procurator-General : Ying Yong People's Procuratorates Judicial Police Judiciary of Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal Department of Justice Prosecutions Division Law enforcement in Hong Kong Disciplined Services Security Bureau Hong Kong Police Force Judiciary of Macau Court of Final Appeal Public Prosecutions Office Secretariat for Security Macau Security Force Unitary Police Services [ zh ] Public Security Police Judiciary Police [ zh ] United front System of multi-party cooperation and political consultation Political Consultative Conference National Committee ( 14th ) Chairman : Wang Huning Vice-Chairpersons Top-ranked: Shi Taifeng Secretary-General : Wang Dongfeng Political parties : CCP (ruling) United Front Work Department Head : Li Ganjie Democratic parties RCCK CDL CNDCA CAPD CPWDP CZGP JS TDSL Historical parties: KMT CDSP YCP Federation of Industry and Commerce People's organizations Law enforcement CCP Central Politics and Law Commission Secretary : Chen Wenqing Enforced disappearance Ministry of Public Security Minister : Wang Xiaohong Public Security Organs People's Police State Immigration Administration Local public security bureaus Ministry of State Security Minister : Chen Yixin State Security Organs People's Police Ministry of Justice Minister : He Rong Judicial Administrative Organs People's Police People's Armed Police 1st Mobile Contingent 2nd Mobile Contingent China Coast Guard Bureau of Prison Administration [ zh ] Office for Safeguarding National Security Urban Management (chengguan) Propaganda Central Leading Group for Propaganda, Ideology and Culture Leader: Cai Qi Deputy Leaders: Li Shulei , Shen Yiqin Central Guidance Commission on Building Spiritual Civilization Director: Cai Qi Deputy Director: Li Shulei Publicity Department of the Chinese Communist Party Head : Li Shulei General Administration of Press and Publication China Film Administration State Council Information Office China Daily Ministry of Culture and Tourism National Radio and Television Administration China Media Group China Central Television China Global Television Network China National Radio China Radio International Xinhua News Agency Reference News China News Service People's Daily Global Times China Today Censorship in China Great Cannon Great Firewall Overseas censorship Radio jamming Media of China Internal media International communication centers Publishing industry in China Internet in China Internet censorship Central Cyberspace Affairs Commission Director: Cai Qi Cyberspace Administration of China Director: Zhuang Rongwen Hong Kong Macau Central Leading Group on Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Leader: Ding Xuexiang HK & Macau Affairs Office Director: Xia Baolong Hong Kong Liaison Office Macau Liaison Office One country, two systems Special administrative regions Hong Kong Basic Law Chief Executive : John Lee Ka-chiu Hong Kong SAR Government Politics of Hong Kong Pro-Beijing camp Pro-democracy camp Independence movement Mainland & HK CEPA Macao Basic Law Chief Executive : Ho Iat-seng Macau SAR Government Politics of Macau Mainland & Macau CEPA Cross-strait relations Cross-strait relations Chinese Civil War One China Political status of Taiwan Republic of China on Taiwan Taiwan Area "Taiwan Province", PRC Taiwan independence movement Anti-Secession Law Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement Chinese unification Central Leading Group for Taiwan Affairs Leader: Xi Jinping Deputy Leader: Wang Huning Taiwan Affairs Office Director: Song Tao Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits Foreign relations Central Foreign Affairs Commission Director: Xi Jinping Deputy Director: Li Qiang Secretary-General: Wang Yi Ministry of Foreign Affairs Minister : Wang Yi Spokespersons Diplomatic missions Diplomatic missions of China / in China Foreign aid from China / to China International Development Cooperation Agency Ministry of Commerce Exim Bank of China China Development Bank Belt and Road Initiative Silk Road Fund Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank BRICS New Development Bank Ministry of National Defense International Military Cooperation Office NPC Foreign Affairs Committee CCP International Department State Administration of Foreign Experts Affairs Overseas Chinese Affairs Office Chinese nationality law Chinese passports ( Hong Kong ; Macau ) Visa requirements for Chinese citizens ( Hong Kong , Macau ) Visa policy of China ( Hong Kong ; Macau ) National Immigration Administration Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence Panda diplomacy Beijing Consensus Community of Common Destiny China and the United Nations China and the World Trade Organization Shanghai Cooperation Organisation China–Africa relations China–Arab relations China–Caribbean relations China–European Union relations China–Latin America relations China–Pacific relations China–Russia relations China–United States relations Related topics Administrative divisions Chinese information operations Ethnic minorities Family planning Hukou system Human rights in China Chinese intelligence activity abroad China portal Other countries v t e The primary stage of socialism (sometimes referred to as the preliminary stage of socialism ), [ 1 ] introduced into official discourse by Mao Zedong as the initial stage of socialism , is a sub-theory of Chinese Marxist thought which explains why capitalist techniques are used in the Chinese economy . It maintains that China is in the first stage of building a communist society , in a stage where there is private ownership.

[ 2 ] Origins [ edit ] The concept of a primary stage of socialism was conceived before China introduced economic reforms.

[ 3 ] When discussing the necessity of commodity relations at the 1st Zhengzhou Conference held between 2 and 10 November 1958, Mao Zedong —the Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party —said that China was in the "initial stage of socialism".

[ 3 ] Mao did not elaborate on the idea; his successors did.

[ 3 ] Xue Muqiao's theory of the "immature socialist system" [ edit ] Xue Muqiao introduced the term "underdeveloped socialism" in his book China's Socialist Economy .

[ 4 ] The book was written in the orthodox Marxist–Leninist framework enunciated by Joseph Stalin in Economic Problems of Socialism in the U.S.S.R.

(1952).

[ 5 ] Xue wrote that within the socialist mode of production there were several phases and for China to reach an advanced form of socialism it had to focus on developing the productive forces .

[ 5 ] He proposed a theory in which the basic laws of economic growth were those in which "the relations of production must conform to the level of the productive forces".

[ 5 ] Similarly to Stalin, Xue considered the productive forces to be primary and that this was a fundamental universal law of economics.

[ 5 ] Unlike Stalin, Xue believed there were principles that guided the socialist transition, the key one being the principle of " from each according to his ability, to each according to his work "; this principle would guide socialist development, even when China had reached advanced socialism, and would be replaced with " from each according to his ability, to each according to his need " only when there existed general abundance.

[ 6 ] Xue based his arguments upon the economic policies pursued during the Cultural Revolution , which he believed had led to "the most severe setbacks and heaviest losses suffered by the Party, the state and the people since the founding of the People's Republic".

[ 6 ] Xue believed the relations of production were determined by ownership in the economy.

[ 6 ] He said that since the productive forces in China were "backward", the relations of production were at a comparable level.

[ 7 ] While believing industry in China had become the "ownership of the whole people", Xue said agriculture was lagging far behind, which required ending the practice of paying wages based on collective efforts, supporting the re-introduction of individual incentives and increasing state investments in agriculture.

[ 7 ] Xue's suggestions were abandoned at the 6th Plenary Session of the 11th Central Committee held in June 1981 because they failed to solve the problems facing agriculture.

[ 8 ] From the 6th Plenary Session onwards, the CCP led by Wan Li began supporting the de-collectivization of agriculture.

[ 8 ] At the beginning, Wan chose a conservative reformist approach, stating that: Prudence is necessary when approaching the reform of the commune institutions. We should not require each level to reform from top to bottom by prescribing a time limit for fulfilment. Until suitable new organizational forms can replace production brigades and teams, we should not recklessly change existing forms and bring about a disorderly situation.

[ 9 ] Wan called for the dismantlement of the People's Commune system and its replacement with a household-responsibility system .

[ 9 ] He referred to the changes underway in the agricultural system as the creation of a new mode of production and called it the socialist commodity economy .

[ 9 ] Party theorist Du Runsheng supported Wan's position, saying, "a principle of Marxism is that every change in the relations of ownership is an inevitable outcome of the development of new productive forces which can no longer fit in with the old relations of ownership".

[ 10 ] He also said: Today's household undertakings are very different in nature. Since land is owned by the public, they are restricted by the collective economy in many ways. They represent a level of management in the co-operative economy, and constitute an organic component part of the entire socialist economy... It is feared that the household contracting system will promote the conservative idea of private possession among the peasants. This fear is not without grounds. However, we must be able to see the other side of the matter, which also happens to be the prevailing aspect. Today's peasants are different from those of the past. They are now new-type labourers under the socialist co-operative system.

[ 10 ] Su Shaozhi's theory of "undeveloped socialism" [ edit ] CCP theoretician Su Shaozhi , an official from the People's Daily , began a debate in 1979 at a CCP theory conference to re-examine Mao Zedong's assertion of " class struggle as the key link" when he introduced the term "undeveloped socialism" to refer to China.

[ 11 ] Su, co-writing with Feng Langrui , published an article in Economic Research ( Chinese : 经济研究 ; pinyin : Jīngjì yánjiū ) in 1979 which called into question the Chinese socialist project by using Marxist methodology.

[ 11 ] The article analyzed the basis of Chinese socialism by looking at the writings of Karl Marx . Marx drew a distinction between lower-stage communism—commonly referred to as the socialist mode of production — and higher-phase communism—often referred to as communism .

[ 11 ] Su's and Feng's article created two subdivisions within the socialist mode of production; the first phase was the transition from the capitalist mode of production to the socialist mode of production—the phase in which the proletariat seized power and set-up the dictatorship of the proletariat and in which undeveloped socialism was created. The second phase was advanced socialism; the socialism that Marx wrote about.

[ 11 ] They said China was an undeveloped socialist nation because: [ 12 ] The characteristics of undeveloped socialism are the two forms of public ownership, commodity production and commodity exchange. Capitalists have been basically eliminated as a class but there are still capitalist and bourgeois remnants, even feudal remnants. There also exist quite a few small producers, class differences among workers and peasants … and the force of habit of small-scale producers. The production forces are still not highly developed. And there is not an abundance of products … Therefore, the transition toward socialism has not yet been completed.

[ 12 ] Su and Feng opposed the party line that the main contradiction in Chinese society was between the " advanced social system " and the "backward production forces".

[ 13 ] This line, originally conceived of at the 8th National Congress held in 1956 but removed by Mao and re-introduced after Mao's death, was intended to emphasize the importance of improving the economy. Su found it problematic because it meant that the superstructure could be more advanced than the level of the productive forces—a statement that was not in line with classical Marxism.

[ 13 ] Su countered, saying that China did not have a material base for a full transition to socialism. He said: [ 13 ] The socialist system consists mainly of production relations. Whether a production relation is advanced or not is determined by just one criterion, namely, whether or not it can meet the demands of production forces and facilitate their development. Although some production relations, such as commune ownership, may be superior to ownership by the production team in terms of the stage of development, in rural China today, where manual labor remains predominant, only ownership by the production team, rather than by the commune, would be the type of production relations capable of measuring up to the level of production forces and facilitating their development. If ... commune ownership is adopted, it would damage the development of production forces.

[ 13 ] The response to Su and Feng's article was mixed. Some responded positively and called for a retreat from socialist practices and a return to the policies of New Democracy —a period that lasted until 1956 when China had a mixed economy. More conservative elements tried to suppress it.

[ 14 ] Deng Liqun , the Deputy President of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences (CASS), used his powers to organize a meeting which criticized Su, who had become a member of the CASS Institute of Marxism–Leninism after writing the article.

[ 15 ] While Su garnered some support from high-standing officials, such as General Ye Jianying , the concept was the target of several crackdowns; the first occurred in 1981 during a crackdown on socialists supporting liberal democracy . A later crackdown was orchestrated by longstanding party theoretician Hu Qiamou and thirdly during the Anti-Spiritual Pollution Campaign in 1983.

[ 15 ] The reasoning was that the idea lent weight for forces opposed to socialism in China and was therefore dangerous.

[ 15 ] Despite this, the 6th Plenary Session of the 11th Central Committee sanctioned the idea that China was in the "primary stage of socialism", even if key theoreticians such as Wang Xiaoqiang dismissed Chinese socialism as " agrarian socialism ", believing that socialism had been constructed on a feudal base.

[ 16 ] Formulating the theory of a primary stage of socialism [ edit ] Su's theory of undeveloped socialism led to the formulation of the primary stage of socialism theory under CCP General Secretary Zhao Ziyang 's stewardship.

[ 17 ] The term had been used by the CCP during the Anti-Spiritual Pollution Campaign of 1983 but had never been explained.

[ 17 ] After consulting with Deng Xiaoping , the theory of a primary stage of socialism was used as the theoretical basis of the Political Report to the 13th National Congress held in 1987.

[ 17 ] The theory focused mainly on developing the productive forces and took a highly economic deterministic view on developing socialism.

[ 18 ] Despite certain pitfalls, the theory is still used to explain the use of capitalist techniques in China.

[ 18 ] The main aim of the theory was to reconceptualize socialism to make Marxism fit for contemporary use.

[ 19 ] Su and Zhang Xiangyang said the primary stage of socialism in China began in the 1950s when the CCP put an end to the policies of New Democracy and would last an estimated 100 years.

[ 20 ] The previous emphasis on economic equality in favour of economic growth was abandoned. Deng stated: Of the many lessons we have to sum up, a very important one is this: we should make clear what is socialism and how to build socialism ... The primary task of socialism is to develop production forces and to elevate the standard of the material and cultural life of the people. Our twenty years of experience from 1958 to 1976 have told us: poverty is not socialism , socialism is to eliminate poverty. It is not socialism to not develop production forces and raise the people's living standards.

[ 21 ] By this point, Deng had equated upholding socialism with developing the level of the productive forces; the ideal of common equality was postponed until an unspecified time.

[ 21 ] Su and Zhang reached similar conclusions, saying that Marx had two goals when he wrote about the socialist future: a social system in which the productive forces developed and the individual would be granted a great chance of self-development.

[ 21 ] However, developing the productive forces became the precondition for the greater self-learning of the individual through common equality; Su and Zhang said that the former would lead to the latter.

[ 21 ] The left were generally pleased with the theory, which was based upon orthodox Marxist premises. However, some people on the right considered the theory was proof that China needed to reintroduce capitalism to build socialism. Marx had written that socialism developed from capitalism, but China had skipped the capitalist mode of production and went from feudalism to socialism.

[ 22 ] Zhao's adviser Bao Tong 's article "The Young Horse of Socialism, the Old Horse of Capitalism, and Other Related Matters published in the People's Daily , became the first theoretical work which tried to explain the concept.

[ 23 ] Bao said because the economic foundation of socialism in China was weak and contained elements of feudalism, and that acknowledging China's position as being in the primary stage of socialism would answer "many ideological questions can be readily solved".

[ 23 ] Chen Junsheng , the Secretary-General of the State Council , wrote a similar article that stressed the need to uphold the Four Cardinal Principles and reform during the primary stage of socialism.

[ 23 ] Further developments [ edit ] General Secretary Jiang Zemin further elaborated on the concept, first during a speech to the CCP Central Party School on 29 May 1997 and again in his report to the 15th National Congress on 12 September.

[ 24 ] According to Jiang, the 3rd plenum of the 11th Central Committee correctly analyzed and formulated a scientifically correct program for the problems facing China and socialism .

[ 24 ] In Jiang's words, the primary stage of socialism was an "undeveloped stage".

[ 24 ] The fundamental task of socialism is to develop the productive forces, therefore the main aim during the primary stage should be the further development of the national productive forces.

[ 24 ] The primary contradiction in Chinese society during the primary stage of socialism is "the growing material and cultural needs of the people and the backwardness of production".

[ 24 ] This contradiction will remain until China has completed the process of primary stage of socialism—and because of it—economic development should remain the party's main focus during this stage.

[ 24 ] Jiang elaborated on three points to develop the primary stage of socialism.

[ 25 ] The first—to develop a socialist economy with Chinese characteristics—meant developing the economy by emancipating and modernizing the forces of production while developing a market economy .

[ 25 ] The second—building socialist politics with Chinese characteristics—meant "managing state affairs according to the law", developing socialist democracy under the party and making the "people the masters of the country".

[ 25 ] The third point—building socialist culture with Chinese characteristics—meant turning Marxism into the guide to train the people so as to give them "high ideals, moral integrity, a good education, and a strong sense of discipline, and developing a national scientific, and popular socialist culture geared to the needs of modernization, of the world, and of the future".

[ 25 ] When asked how long the primary stage of socialism would last, Zhao replied "[i]t will be at least 100 years [...] [before] socialist modernization will have been in the main accomplished".

[ 26 ] The state constitution states that "China will be in the primary stage of socialism for a long time to come".

[ 27 ] As with Zhao, Jiang believed that it would take at least 100 years to reach a more advanced stage.

[ 24 ] In January 2021, CCP General Secretary Xi Jinping said that for China to "advance from the primary stage to a higher one, it is necessary to fully build a modern socialist China and basically realize socialist modernization".

[ 2 ] [ 28 ] Effect on party ideology [ edit ] Further information: Ideology of the Communist Party of China Changing views on capitalism [ edit ] Further information: Socialist market economy The reconception of socialism led directly to the reconception of capitalism because of their diametric opposition to each other.

[ 29 ] Previously, the CCP had said supporting capitalism meant supporting a historical retreat and capitalism was considered the diametric opposite of socialism and their relations were considered hostile and incompatible.

[ 29 ] The official reconception of the two terms was sanctioned in the Political Report to the 13th National Congress.

[ 29 ] Before the reform efforts, capitalism and socialism were believed to be part of a sequential relationship, the latter developing from the former.

[ 29 ] A less traditional view was that capitalism had proven it had a "greater capacity for creating human civilization" than Marx expected, which indirectly meant that socialism could learn from capitalism.

[ 29 ] Another mark of continuity was that the two systems existed alongside each other.

[ 29 ] The first change in official discourse was to rebuke Vladimir Lenin 's theory of imperialism.

[ 30 ] Lenin had reached the conclusion that capitalism had reached the stage of imperialism, a stage in which capitalism would undergo a protracted crisis that would lead to war, the inevitable socialist revolutions and the end of war by the newly established socialist states.

[ 30 ] This theory had formed the basis of Chinese foreign policy well into the 1970s, but was not officially rebuked until Zhao's report to the 13th National Congress.

[ 30 ] At the congress, Zhao re-used a 1985 statement by Deng Xiaoping, in which he said, "[t]he major themes of the contemporary world are peace and development".

[ 30 ] By saying that the task of socialist countries was maintaining "peace and development" rather than "war and revolution", Deng was upbraiding Lenin's theory.

[ 30 ] According to Su and Zhang, the rationale for the change was that: [ 30 ] the decline in ideological conflict in tandem with the creation of nuclear weapons had radically changed East–West relations and the end of colonialism had altered the basis of North–South relations; [ 30 ] technical and scientific progress had—despite Marx' forecast—strengthened capitalism and changed the international arena since Lenin's death; [ 30 ] the increased economic interdependence brought by economic globalization had reduced the risks of war; [ 30 ] the reforms within socialist states had brought socialist economies closer to the world market and the capitalist economies.

[ 30 ] Xu Jiatun , a Party theoretician, said capitalism had changed from the days of Marx; proof of this was "the emergence of macroeconomic regulation , the welfare state , and the middle class that had ameliorated socioeconomic structures and class relations under capitalism.

[ 31 ] Xu concluded that capitalism had proved a more successful system than Chinese socialism, which was based on feudal ideology and institutions.

[ 31 ] Yu Guangyuan said Marx was wrong and that the changes within capitalism had allowed for a much greater development of the productive forces than Marx could ever think possible.

[ 31 ] However, the most common view was the convergence theory , whose adherents' views were published in leading media outlets throughout the country.

[ 31 ] The convergence theory said socialism and capitalism were becoming increasingly similar, since capitalist and socialist countries were becoming increasingly similar in economic terms; planning was taking place in capitalism, market economics was occurring in socialism, ownership and management were separated under both systems, and both had undergone similar patterns of modernization.

[ 31 ] On this basis, the proponents of convergence theory called on people to stop asking whether a certain technique was capitalist or socialist because it did not matter anymore.

[ 31 ] The result of the convergence theory was to de-ideologize the meaning of the two terms.

[ 31 ] Historical materialism: universal law or methodology [ edit ] Further information: Historical materialism At the 13th National Congress, Zhao concluded that the common rightist error when analyzing Chinese development was to question the legitimacy of the revolution and socialist superstructural elements established in its aftermath and that the common leftist error was to believe that you could skip over the primary stage of socialism directly to advanced socialism, a view that Zhao designated as utopian.

[ 32 ] However, there was a problem; according to official statements, China had an advanced superstructure and a backward productive forces; this went against classical Marxism, which said the superstructure was "solely determined by economic factors"—in China the mode of production was determined by the superstructure.

[ 32 ] All this went against the general notion of Marx' theory of historical materialism , which states that a mode of production is solely grounded on the material base.

[ 32 ] However, Su and Zhang did not believe these discrepancies had proven the theory wrong; they concluded that historical materialism should be considered "a scientific methodology for the analysis of the general trend", not a universal law that explained former and future historical processes.

[ 32 ] According to Su and Zhang, instead of viewing one factor—economy—as dominant, as was previously done, one should analyze how all factors interact with each other, especially the effects of the superstructure on the rest of society.

[ 32 ] In their view, superstructural elements "played an obvious role in China's 'leap' from semifeudalism to socialism". Socialism in China was safeguarded by the CCP and its commitment to Marxist ideology.

[ 32 ] The problem with historical materialism as law-binding was, according to the rightists, what role humans played in historical development and the possibility of the existence of modes of production other than those outlined by Marx.

[ 32 ] According to Hong Yingsan , the notion of a primary stage of socialism was difficult because it entailed that China was simultaneously pre-capitalist and post-capitalist.

[ 32 ] This went against the basic notion in historical materialism that history was unilinear rather than multilinear , and proved that other factors than the productive forces in society "could determine the mode of production in a given society".

[ 32 ] The problem facing the CCP was that unilinear view of history meant that China could not adopt socialism because it had skipped the capitalist mode of production, but a multilinear view meant that China did not need to adopt socialism because it was not a specific "stage in human evolution".

[ 32 ] Su and Zhang said the most pressing problem for CCP theorists to answer was, "do people have freedom to choose a particular set of production relations?".

[ 33 ] They pointed to Marx's theory of an Asiatic mode of production .

[ 34 ] Some rightists argued against the mode of productions envisioned by Marx, stating that all changes in human history were subjective and were not guided by universal laws.

[ 34 ] The role of Marxism [ edit ] While the CCP pursued non-orthodox economic policies, it believed the party would be able to safeguard China's goal of socialist development by transforming Marxism into a dominant value system.

[ 31 ] This was reflected by the introduction of the term " socialist spiritual civilization ", a concept introduced in 1981 and mentioned in the Political Report to the 13th National Congress.

[ 31 ] The main function of socialist spiritual civilization was to check against the dangers of ideological retreat in the party's effort to progress toward socialism.

[ 31 ] A CCP resolution in 1986 said, "we will be not able to guarantee the socialist direction of our modernization course, and our socialist society will lose its goals and ideals" if the party stopped upholding Marxist doctrine.

[ 35 ] However, because the material base, officially referred to as material civilization, created by the economic reforms did not conform with Marxist analysis of socialism, the CCP concluded that in the new era, Marxism would be given the role as the dominant value system, which entailed that other value systems could be accepted but these systems could not negate Marxism.

[ 36 ] See also [ edit ] China portal Communism portal China model State capitalism References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Properly Understand Theories Concerning Preliminary Stage of Socialism , by Wei Xinghua and Sang Baichuan. 1998. Journal of Renmin University of China, 1998,V(1): 7-13,126.

^ a b "Some Chinese want their country to move closer to communism" .

The Economist .

ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 7 August 2022 .

^ a b c Li 1995 , p. 400.

^ McCarthy 1985 , p. 142.

^ a b c d McCarthy 1985 , p. 143.

^ a b c McCarthy 1985 , p. 144.

^ a b McCarthy 1985 , p. 145.

^ a b McCarthy 1985 , p. 146.

^ a b c McCarthy 1985 , p. 147.

^ a b McCarthy 1985 , p. 148.

^ a b c d Sun 1995 , p. 184.

^ a b Sun 1995 , pp. 184–185.

^ a b c d Sun 1995 , p. 185.

^ Sun 1995 , pp. 185–186.

^ a b c Sun 1995 , p. 186.

^ Sun 1995 , p. 186–187.

^ a b c Sun 1995 , p. 195.

^ a b Sun 1995 , pp. 196–197.

^ Sun 1995 , p. 199–201.

^ Sun 1995 , p. 202.

^ a b c d Sun 1995 , p. 203.

^ Sun 1995 , pp. 203–204.

^ a b c Fewsmith 1997 , p. 205.

^ a b c d e f g He 2001 , p. 386.

^ a b c d He 2001 , p. 387.

^ Vogel 2011 , p. 589.

^ 2nd session of the 9th National People's Congress (14 March 2004).

"Constitution of the People's Republic of China" .

Government of the People's Republic of China . Archived from the original on 26 July 2013 . Retrieved 14 January 2013 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Xi stresses good start for fully building modern socialist China" .

State Council of China . 12 January 2021 . Retrieved 12 January 2025 .

^ a b c d e f Sun 1995 , p. 206.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Sun 1995 , p. 207.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Sun 1995 , p. 208.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Sun 1995 , p. 204.

^ Sun 1995 , pp. 204–205.

^ a b Sun 1995 , p. 205.

^ Sun 1995 , pp. 208–209.

^ Sun 1995 , p. 209.

Sources [ edit ] Books cited Fewsmith, Joseph (1997).

Dilemmas of Reform in China: Political Conflict and Economic Debate .

M.E. Sharpe .

ISBN 978-1-56324-328-8 .

Li, Gucheng (1995).

A Glossary of Political Terms of the People's Republic of China .

Chinese University Press .

ISBN 9789622016156 .

McCarthy, Greg (1985). Brugger, Bill (ed.).

Chinese Marxism in Flux, 1978–84: Essays on Epistemology, Ideology, and Political Economy .

M.E. Sharpe .

ISBN 978-0-87332-323-9 .

Sun, Yan (1995).

The Chinese Reassessment of Socialism, 1976–1992 .

Princeton University Press .

ISBN 978-0-691-02998-6 .

He, Henry Yuhuai (2001).

Dictionary of the Political Thought of the People's Republic of China .

M.E. Sharpe .

ISBN 978-0-7656-0569-6 .

Vogel, Ezra (2011).

Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China .

Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-674-05544-5 .

v t e China articles History Overviews History Timeline Historiography Military history Language Economic before 1912 1912–1949 1949–present Ethnic groups Foreign relations Dynasties Monarchs Prehistoric Paleolithic Neolithic Yellow River Yangtze Liao Ancient Xia Shang Late Zhou Western Zhou Spring and Autumn Warring States Imperial Qin Han Three Kingdoms Wei Han Wu Jin (266–420) Sixteen Kingdoms Northern and Southern dynasties Sui Tang Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Liao Song Jin (1115–1234) Yuan Ming Qing High Qing Century of humiliation Taiping Rebellion Eunuch Modern 1911 Revolution Republic of China Chinese Civil War Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China Cultural Revolution Reform and opening up Tiananmen Square COVID-19 persecution of Uyghurs List of massacres in China Geography Borders Extreme points Geology Natural disasters Regions East Northeast North South Central Central South Western Northwestern Southwestern Terrain Bays Canyons Caves Deserts Grasslands Hills Islands Mountains ranges passes Peninsulas Northeast / North / Central Plains Valleys Volcanoes Water Canals Lakes Rivers Waterfalls Wetlands Water resources Seas Bohai Yellow East China South China Environment Climate change Climate policy Environmental issues Environmental policy Protected areas National parks Nature reserves UNESCO Biosphere Reserves Wildlife Fauna Flora Subdivisions Baseline islands Border crossings Cities Province-level subdivisions Politics Law Judicial system Human rights LGBT in Tibet Law enforcement Penal system Naming laws Nationality law Terrorism Government Civil service Constitution Democracy Pro-democratisation Elections Environmental policy Foreign relations Laogai National People's Congress Standing Committee National security Political parties and movements Chinese Communist Party General Secretary Politburo Democratic parties (China) United front Political Consultative Conference System of multi-party cooperation and political consultation Socialism with Chinese characteristics Primary stage of socialism President Vice President State Council Premier Vice Premier Whole-process people's democracy One country, two systems Military Outline of military history Central Military Commission Cyberwarfare and China Ministry of National Defense People's Liberation Army Ground Navy Air Rocket Strategic Support People's Armed Police Coast Guard Militia Maritime Militia Economy Agriculture Aquaculture Banking Central bank Chinese property sector crisis (2020–present) Currency Economic history Reform and opening up Special economic zones E-commerce Online advertising Economic inequality in China Energy Coal Petroleum Renewable Forced evictions Foreign aid received Foreign aid program Historical GDP Housing Income inequality in China Industry Chemical Gold mining Semiconductors Steel Textiles Labor relations Poverty Real estate Standard of living Taxation Tourism Trade Underoccupied developments Unemployment Infrastructure Architecture Housing Telecommunications Internet Water supply and sanitation Transport Automotive industry Civil aviation Rail Shipping industry Space program Society Abortion Censorship Chinese Dream Chinese language Standard Chinese Written Chinese Crime Corruption Prostitution Sex trafficking Education Literacy Freedom of the press Harmonious Society Health Food safety incidents HIV/AIDS Intellectualism Internment camps Martyrdom Surveillance Propaganda Protest ”Mass incidents” Public holidays Rural society Science and technology history Sexuality Social issues Patriarchy Racism Regional discrimination Suicide Social relations Structure Tang ping Time Urban society Welfare Culture Archaeology Archives Art Calligraphy Cinema Cuisine Dance Libraries Literature Poetry Martial arts Mass media Music Names Philosophy Smoking Sport Tea culture Variety art Major Historical and Cultural Sites World Heritage Sites Fours of China Four Treasures of the Study Four Great Inventions Four Gentlemen Flowers of the Four Seasons Four Beauties Four Classic Novels Four arts Four Symbols Four Holy Beasts Four Pillars of Destiny Four Paragons of the Early Tang Four Masters of the Ming dynasty Four Masters of the Yuan dynasty Four Wangs Gang of Four Four Olds Four Pests campaign Demographics Emigration Ethnic groups Eunuchs Internal migration Languages Life expectancy Statistics Population history " Post-80s " " Post-90s " Urbanization Women Religion Buddhism Chinese Buddhism Tibetan Buddhism Confucianism Folk religion Christianity Catholic Church in China Protestantism Freedom of religion History of religion Irreligion Islam Taoism Symbols Anthem Emblem Flag Outline Index Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Primary_stage_of_socialism&oldid=1298458555 " Categories : Economic history of the People's Republic of China Ideology of the Chinese Communist Party Reform and opening up Socialism with Chinese characteristics Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from November 2017 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from November 2017 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Use dmy dates from October 2017 Use British English from October 2017 Articles containing Chinese-language text This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 16:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Primary stage of socialism 5 languages Add topic

