Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Childhood Toggle Childhood subsection 1.1 Birth 1.2 Regencies 2 Rule in Scotland Toggle Rule in Scotland subsection 2.1 Marriage 2.2 Witch hunts 2.3 Highlands and Islands 2.4 Theory of monarchy 2.5 Literary patronage 3 Accession in England 4 Early reign in England, King of Great Britain Toggle Early reign in England, King of Great Britain subsection 4.1 Gunpowder Plot 5 King and Parliament Toggle King and Parliament subsection 5.1 Spanish match 6 King and Church 7 Personal relationships 8 Health and death 9 Legacy 10 Titles, styles, honours, and arms Toggle Titles, styles, honours, and arms subsection 10.1 Titles and styles 10.2 Arms 11 Issue 12 Family tree 13 Ancestry 14 List of writings 15 Notes 16 References 17 Sources 18 Further reading 19 External links Toggle the table of contents James VI and I 85 languages Afrikaans Ænglisc العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kernowek Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский संस्कृतम् Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 8 August 2025 .

King of Scotland from 1567 to 1625, King of England and Ireland from 1603 James VI and I Portrait attributed to John de Critz , c.

1605 King of England and Ireland ( more...

) Reign 24 March 1603 – 27 March 1625 Coronation 25 July 1603 Predecessor Elizabeth I Successor Charles I King of Scotland ( more...

) Reign 24 July 1567 – 27 March 1625 Coronation 29 July 1567 Predecessor Mary Successor Charles I Regents See list James Stewart, Earl of Moray (1567‍–‍1570) Matthew Stewart, Earl of Lennox (1570‍–‍1571) John Erskine, Earl of Mar (1571‍–‍1572) James Douglas, Earl of Morton (1572‍–‍1579) Born 19 June 1566 Edinburgh Castle , Edinburgh, Scotland Died 27 March 1625 (aged 58) Theobalds House , Hertfordshire, England Burial 7 May 1625 Westminster Abbey Spouse Anne of Denmark ​ ​ ( m.

1589 ; died 1619 ) ​ Issue more...

Henry Frederick, Prince of Wales Elizabeth, Queen of Bohemia Margaret Charles I, King of England Robert, Duke of Kintyre and Lorne Mary Sophia Names James Charles Stuart House Stuart Father Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley Mother Mary, Queen of Scots Signature James VI and I (James Charles Stuart; 19 June 1566 – 27 March 1625) was King of Scotland as James VI from 24 July 1567 and King of England and Ireland as James I from the union of the Scottish and English crowns on 24 March 1603 until his death in 1625. Though he long attempted to get both countries to adopt a closer political union, the kingdoms of Scotland and England remained sovereign states , with their own parliaments, judiciaries, and laws, ruled by James in personal union .

James was the son of Mary, Queen of Scots , and a great-great-grandson of Henry VII , King of England and Lord of Ireland, and thus a potential successor to all three thrones. He acceded to the Scottish throne at the age of thirteen months, after his mother was forced to abdicate in his favour. Although his mother was a Catholic, James was brought up as a Protestant. Four regents governed during his minority , which ended officially in 1578, though he did not gain full control of his government until 1583. In 1589, he married Anne of Denmark . Three of their children survived to adulthood: Henry Frederick , Elizabeth , and Charles . In 1603, James succeeded his cousin Elizabeth I , the last Tudor monarch of England and Ireland, who died childless. He continued to reign in all three kingdoms for 22 years, a period known as the Jacobean era , until his death in 1625. After the Union of the Crowns, he based himself in England (the largest of the three realms) from 1603, returning to Scotland only once, in 1617, and styled himself " King of Great Britain and Ireland ". He advocated for a single parliament for England and Scotland. In his reign, the Plantation of Ulster and English colonisation of the Americas began.

At 57 years and 246 days, James's reign in Scotland was the longest of any Scottish monarch . He achieved most of his aims in Scotland but faced great difficulties in England, including the Gunpowder Plot in 1605 and conflicts with the English Parliament . Under James, the "Golden Age" of Elizabethan literature and drama continued, with writers such as William Shakespeare , John Donne , Ben Jonson , and Francis Bacon contributing to a flourishing literary culture.

[ 1 ] James was a prolific writer, authoring works such as Daemonologie (1597), The True Law of Free Monarchies (1598), and Basilikon Doron (1599).

[ 2 ] He sponsored the translation of the Bible into English (later named after him, the Authorized King James Version ), and the 1604 revision of the Book of Common Prayer .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Contemporary courtier Anthony Weldon claimed that James had been termed "the wisest fool in Christendom " (wise in small things, foolish otherwise) an epithet associated with his character ever since.

[ 5 ] Since the latter half of the 20th century, historians have tended to revise James's reputation and treat him as a serious and thoughtful monarch.

[ 6 ] He was strongly committed to a peace policy, and tried to avoid involvement in religious wars , especially the Thirty Years' War that devastated much of Central Europe. He tried but failed to prevent the rise of hawkish elements in the English Parliament who wanted war with Spain.

[ 7 ] The first English king of the House of Stuart , he was succeeded by his second son, Charles I.

Childhood [ edit ] Birth [ edit ] Portrait of James as a boy, after Arnold Bronckorst , 1574 James was the only son of Mary, Queen of Scots , and her second husband, Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley . Mary and Darnley were great-grandchildren of Henry VII of England through Margaret Tudor , the older sister of Henry VIII . Mary's rule over Scotland was insecure, and she and her husband, being Roman Catholics , faced a rebellion by Protestant noblemen. During Mary's and Darnley's difficult marriage, [ 8 ] Darnley secretly allied himself with the rebels and conspired in the murder of the queen's private secretary, David Rizzio , just three months before James's birth.

[ 9 ] James was born on 19 June 1566 at Edinburgh Castle , and as the eldest son and heir apparent of the monarch automatically became Duke of Rothesay and Prince and Great Steward of Scotland . Five days later, the English diplomat Henry Killigrew saw the queen, who had not fully recovered and could only speak faintly. The baby was "sucking at his nurse" and was "well proportioned and like to prove a goodly prince".

[ 10 ] He was baptised "Charles James" or "James Charles" on 17 December 1566 in a Catholic ceremony held at Stirling Castle . His godparents were Charles IX of France (represented by John, Count of Brienne ), Elizabeth I of England (represented by the Francis Russell, Earl of Bedford ), and Emmanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy (represented by ambassador Philibert du Croc ).

[ a ] Mary refused to let the Archbishop of St Andrews , whom she referred to as "a pocky priest", spit in the child's mouth, as was then the custom.

[ 12 ] The subsequent entertainment , devised by Frenchman Bastian Pagez , featured men dressed as satyrs and sporting tails, to which the English guests took offence, thinking the satyrs "done against them".

[ 13 ] Lord Darnley was murdered on 10 February 1567 at Kirk o' Field, Edinburgh, perhaps in revenge for the killing of Rizzio. James inherited his father's titles of Duke of Albany and Earl of Ross . Mary was already unpopular, and her marriage on 15 May 1567 to James Hepburn, Earl of Bothwell , who was widely suspected of murdering Darnley, heightened widespread bad feeling towards her.

[ b ] In June 1567, Protestant rebels arrested Mary and imprisoned her in Lochleven Castle ; she never saw her son again. She was forced to abdicate on 24 July 1567 in favour of the infant James and to appoint her illegitimate half-brother James Stewart, Earl of Moray , as regent .

[ 16 ] This made James the third consecutive Scottish monarch to ascend to the throne as an infant.

Regencies [ edit ] James (right) depicted aged 17 beside his mother, 1583. In reality, they were separated when he was still a baby.

The care of James was entrusted to the Earl and Countess of Mar , "to be conserved, nursed, and upbrought" [ 17 ] in the security of Stirling Castle.

[ 18 ] James was anointed King of Scotland at the age of thirteen months at the Church of the Holy Rude in Stirling, by Adam Bothwell , Bishop of Orkney , on 29 July 1567.

[ 19 ] The sermon at the coronation was preached by John Knox .

[ 20 ] In accordance with the religious beliefs of most of the Scottish ruling class, James was brought up as a member of the Protestant Church of Scotland , the Kirk. The Privy Council selected George Buchanan , Peter Young , Adam Erskine (lay abbot of Cambuskenneth ), and David Erskine (lay abbot of Dryburgh ) as James's preceptors or tutors.

[ 21 ] As the young king's senior tutor, Buchanan subjected James to regular beatings but also instilled in him a lifelong passion for literature and learning.

[ 22 ] Buchanan sought to turn James into a God-fearing, Protestant king who accepted the limitations of monarchy, as outlined in his treatise De Jure Regni apud Scotos .

[ 23 ] In 1568, Mary escaped from Lochleven Castle, leading to several years of sporadic violence. The Earl of Moray defeated Mary's troops at the Battle of Langside , forcing her to flee to England, where she was subsequently kept in confinement by Elizabeth. On 23 January 1570, Moray was assassinated by James Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh .

[ 24 ] The next regent was James's paternal grandfather, Matthew Stewart, Earl of Lennox , who was carried fatally wounded into Stirling Castle a year later after a raid by Mary's supporters.

[ 25 ] His successor, the Earl of Mar, "took a vehement sickness" and died on 28 October 1572 at Stirling. Mar's illness, wrote James Melville , followed a banquet at Dalkeith Palace given by James Douglas, Earl of Morton .

[ 26 ] Morton was elected to Mar's office and proved in many ways the most effective of James's regents, [ 27 ] but he made enemies by his rapacity.

[ 28 ] He fell from favour when Frenchman Esmé Stewart, Sieur d'Aubigny , first cousin of James's father Lord Darnley and future Earl of Lennox , arrived in Scotland and quickly established himself as the first of James's powerful favourites.

[ 29 ] James was proclaimed an adult ruler in a ceremony of Entry to Edinburgh on 19 October 1579.

[ 30 ] Morton was executed on 2 June 1581, belatedly charged with complicity in Darnley's murder.

[ 31 ] On 8 August, James made Lennox the only duke in Scotland.

[ 32 ] The king, then fifteen years old, remained under the influence of Lennox for about one more year.

[ 33 ] Rule in Scotland [ edit ] James in 1586, age 20 (attrib.

Adrian Vanson or the school of Alonso Sánchez Coello ) Lennox was a Protestant convert, but he was distrusted by Scottish Calvinists who noticed the physical displays of affection between him and the king and alleged that Lennox "went about to draw the King to carnal lust".

[ 28 ] In August 1582, in what became known as the Ruthven Raid , the Protestant earls William Ruthven, Earl of Gowrie and Archibald Douglas, Earl of Angus lured James into Ruthven Castle , imprisoned him, [ c ] and forced Lennox to leave Scotland. On 19 September 1582, during James's imprisonment, John Craig , whom the king had personally appointed royal chaplain in 1579, rebuked him so sharply from the pulpit for having issued a proclamation so offensive to the clergy "that the king wept".

[ 35 ] After James escaped from Falkland on 27 June 1583, [ 36 ] he assumed increasing control of his kingdom. He pushed through the Black Acts to assert royal authority over the Kirk, and denounced the writings of his former tutor Buchanan.

[ 37 ] Between 1584 and 1603, he established effective royal government and relative peace among the lords, ably assisted by John Maitland of Thirlestane , who led the government until 1592.

[ 38 ] An eight-man commission known as the Octavians brought some control over the ruinous state of James's finances in 1596, but it drew opposition from vested interests. It was disbanded within a year after a riot in Edinburgh, which was stoked by anti-Catholicism and led the court to withdraw to Linlithgow temporarily.

[ 39 ] One last Scottish attempt against the king's person occurred in August 1600, when James was apparently assaulted by Alexander Ruthven , the younger brother of John Ruthven, Earl of Gowrie at Gowrie House , the seat of the Ruthvens.

[ 40 ] Ruthven was run through by James's page John Ramsay , and the Earl of Gowrie was killed in the ensuing fracas; there were few surviving witnesses. Given James's history with the Ruthvens and the fact that he owed them a great deal of money, his account of the circumstances was not universally believed.

[ 41 ] In 1586, James signed the Treaty of Berwick with England. That and his mother's execution in 1587, which he denounced as a "preposterous and strange procedure", helped clear the way for his succession south of the border.

[ d ] Queen Elizabeth was unmarried and childless, and James was her most likely successor . Securing the English succession became a cornerstone of his policy.

[ 43 ] During the Spanish Armada crisis of 1588, he assured Elizabeth of his support as "your natural son and compatriot of your country".

[ 44 ] Elizabeth sent James an annual subsidy from 1586 which gave her some leverage over affairs in Scotland.

[ 45 ] Marriage [ edit ] 1589 marriage contract between James and Anne of Denmark Queen Anne c.

1605, portrait attributed to John de Critz Throughout his youth, James was praised for his chastity, since he showed little interest in women. After the loss of Lennox, he continued to prefer male company.

[ 46 ] A suitable marriage, however, was necessary to reinforce his rule, and the choice fell on fourteen-year-old Anne of Denmark , younger daughter of the Protestant Danish king Frederick II . Shortly after a proxy marriage in Copenhagen in August 1589, Anne sailed for Scotland but was forced by storms to the coast of Norway.

[ 47 ] On hearing that the crossing had been abandoned, James sailed from Leith with a 300-strong retinue to fetch Anne personally in what historian David Harris Willson called "the one romantic episode of his life".

[ 48 ] [ e ] The couple were married formally at the Bishop's Palace in Oslo on 23 November. James received a dowry of 75,000 Danish dalers and a gift of 10,000 dalers from his mother-in-law, Sophie of Mecklenburg-Güstrow .

[ 50 ] After stays at Elsinore and Copenhagen and a meeting with Tycho Brahe , James and Anne returned to Scotland on 1 May 1590.

[ 51 ] By all accounts, James was at first infatuated with Anne and, in the early years of their marriage, seems always to have shown her patience and affection.

[ 52 ] They attended the wedding celebrations of courtiers and danced in masque costume.

[ 53 ] The royal couple produced three children who survived to adulthood: Henry Frederick, Prince of Wales , who died of typhoid fever in 1612, aged 18; Elizabeth , later queen of Bohemia ; and Charles , James's successor.

Anne suffered from recurrent bouts of sickness and was seriously ill from 1617. James visited Anne only three times during her last illness. She died before her husband , in March 1619.

[ 54 ] Witch hunts [ edit ] Suspected witches kneeling before King James; Daemonologie (1597) James's visit to Denmark, a country familiar with witch-hunts , sparked an interest in the study of witchcraft , [ 55 ] which he considered a branch of theology.

[ 56 ] He attended the North Berwick witch trials , the first major persecution of witches in Scotland under the Witchcraft Act 1563 . Several people were convicted of using witchcraft to send storms against James's ship , most notably Agnes Sampson .

[ 57 ] James became concerned with the threat posed by witches and wrote Daemonologie in 1597, a tract inspired by his personal involvement that opposed the practice of witchcraft and that provided background material for Shakespeare's Macbeth .

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] James personally supervised the torture of women accused of being witches.

[ 58 ] After 1599, his views became more sceptical.

[ 60 ] In a later letter written in England to his son Henry, James congratulates the prince on "the discovery of yon little counterfeit wench. I pray God ye may be my heir in such discoveries ... most miracles now-a-days prove but illusions, and ye may see by this how wary judges should be in trusting accusations." [ 61 ] Highlands and Islands [ edit ] The forcible dissolution of the Lordship of the Isles by James IV of Scotland in 1493 had led to troubled times for the western seaboard. James IV had subdued the organised military might of the Hebrides , but he and his immediate successors lacked the will or ability to provide an alternative form of governance. As a result, the 16th century became known as linn nan creach , the time of raids.

[ 62 ] Furthermore, the effects of the Reformation were slow to affect the Gàidhealtachd , driving a religious wedge between this area and centres of political control in the Central Belt .

[ 63 ] In 1540, James V had toured the Hebrides, forcing the clan chiefs to accompany him. There followed a period of peace, but the clans were soon at loggerheads with one another again.

[ 64 ] During James VI's reign, the citizens of the Hebrides were portrayed as lawless barbarians rather than being the cradle of Scottish Christianity and nationhood. Official documents describe the peoples of the Highlands as "void of the knawledge and feir of God" who were prone to "all kynd of barbarous and bestile cruelteis".

[ 65 ] The Gaelic language, spoken fluently by James IV and probably by James V, became known in the time of James VI as "Erse" or Irish, implying that it was foreign in nature.

Parliament decided that Gaelic had become a principal cause of the Highlanders' shortcomings and sought to abolish it.

[ 66 ] Scottish gold coin from 1609 to 1625 It was against this background that James VI authorised the " Gentleman Adventurers of Fife " to civilise the "most barbarous Isle of Lewis " in 1598. James wrote that the colonists were to act "not by agreement" with the local inhabitants, but "by extirpation of thame". Their landing at Stornoway began well, but the colonists were driven out by local forces commanded by Murdoch and Neil MacLeod. The colonists tried again in 1605 with the same result, although a third attempt in 1607 was more successful.

[ 67 ] The Statutes of Iona were enacted in 1609, which required clan chiefs to provide support for Protestant ministers to Highland parishes; to outlaw bards; to report regularly to Edinburgh to answer for their actions; and to send their heirs to Lowland Scotland , to be educated in English-speaking Protestant schools.

[ 68 ] So began a process "specifically aimed at the extirpation of the Gaelic language, the destruction of its traditional culture and the suppression of its bearers." [ 69 ] In the Northern Isles , James's cousin Patrick Stewart, Earl of Orkney , resisted the Statutes of Iona and was consequently imprisoned.

[ 70 ] His natural son Robert led an unsuccessful rebellion against James, and the Earl and his son were hanged.

[ 71 ] Their estates were forfeited, and the Orkney and Shetland islands were annexed to the Crown.

[ 71 ] Theory of monarchy [ edit ] James argued a theological basis for monarchy in The True Law of Free Monarchies .

In 1597–98, James wrote The True Law of Free Monarchies and Basilikon Doron ( Royal Gift ), in which he argues a theological basis for monarchy. In the True Law , he sets out the divine right of kings , explaining that kings are higher beings than other men for Biblical reasons, though "the highest bench is the sliddriest to sit upon".

[ 72 ] The document proposes an absolutist theory of monarchy, by which a king may impose new laws by royal prerogative but must also pay heed to tradition and to God, who would "stirre up such scourges as pleaseth him, for punishment of wicked kings".

[ 73 ] Basilikon Doron was written as a book of instruction for the four-year-old Prince Henry and provides a more practical guide to kingship.

[ 74 ] The work is considered to be well written and perhaps the best example of James's prose.

[ 75 ] James's advice concerning parliaments, which he understood as merely the king's "head court", foreshadows his difficulties with the English House of Commons : "Hold no Parliaments," he tells Henry, "but for the necesitie of new Lawes, which would be but seldome".

[ 76 ] In the True Law , James maintains that the king owns his realm as a feudal lord owns his fief, because kings arose "before any estates or ranks of men, before any parliaments were holden, or laws made, and by them was the land distributed, which at first was wholly theirs. And so it follows of necessity that kings were the authors and makers of the laws, and not the laws of the kings." [ 77 ] Literary patronage [ edit ] In the 1580s and 1590s, James promoted the literature of his native country. He published his treatise Some Rules and Cautions to be Observed and Eschewed in Scottish Prosody in 1584 at the age of 18. It was both a poetic manual and a description of the poetic tradition in his mother tongue of Scots , applying Renaissance principles.

[ 78 ] He also made statutory provision to reform and promote the teaching of music, seeing the two in connection. One act of his reign urges the Scottish burghs to reform and support the teaching of music in Sang Sculis .

[ 79 ] In furtherance of these aims, James was both patron and head of a loose circle of Scottish Jacobean court poets and musicians known as the Castalian Band , which included William Fowler and Alexander Montgomerie among others, Montgomerie being a favourite of the king.

[ 80 ] James was himself a poet, and was happy to be seen as a practising member of the group.

[ 81 ] By the late 1590s, James's championing of native Scottish tradition was reduced to some extent by the increasing likelihood of his succession to the English throne.

[ 82 ] William Alexander and other courtier poets started to anglicise their written language, and followed the king to London after 1603.

[ 83 ] James's role as active literary participant and patron made him a defining figure in many respects for English Renaissance poetry and drama, which reached a pinnacle of achievement in his reign, [ 84 ] but his patronage of the high style in the Scottish tradition, which included his ancestor James I of Scotland , became largely sidelined.

[ 85 ] Accession in England [ edit ] Main article: Union of the Crowns The Union of the Crowns was symbolised in James's personal royal heraldic badge after 1603, the Tudor rose dimidiated with the Scottish thistle ensigned by the royal crown.

From 1601, in the last years of Elizabeth's life, certain English politicians—notably her chief minister Robert Cecil [ f ] —maintained a secret correspondence with James to prepare in advance for a smooth succession.

[ 87 ] With the queen clearly dying, Cecil sent James a draft proclamation of his accession to the English throne in March 1603. Elizabeth died in the early hours of 24 March, and James was proclaimed king in London later the same day.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] On 5 April, James left Edinburgh for London, promising to return every three years (a promise that he did not keep), and progressed slowly southwards.

[ 90 ] Local lords received him with lavish hospitality along the route and James was amazed by the wealth of his new land and subjects, claiming that he was "swapping a stony couch for a deep feather bed". James arrived in the capital on 7 May, nine days after Elizabeth's funeral.

[ 88 ] [ 91 ] His new subjects flocked to see him, relieved that the succession had triggered neither unrest nor invasion.

[ 92 ] On arrival at London, he was mobbed by a crowd of spectators.

[ 93 ] James's English coronation took place on 25 July at Westminster Abbey . An outbreak of plague restricted festivities. The Royal Entry to London with elaborate allegories provided by dramatic poets such as Thomas Dekker and Ben Jonson was deferred to 15 March 1604.

[ 94 ] Dekker wrote that "the streets seemed to be paved with men; stalls instead of rich wares were set out with children; open casements filled up with women".

[ 95 ] The kingdom to which James succeeded, however, had its problems. Monopolies and taxation had engendered a widespread sense of grievance, and the costs of war in Ireland had become a heavy burden on the government, [ 96 ] which had debts of £400,000.

Early reign in England, King of Great Britain [ edit ] Main article: Jacobean era Portrait after John de Critz , c.

1605. James wears the Three Brothers jewel , three rectangular red spinels ; the jewel is now lost.

James survived two conspiracies in the first year of his reign in England, despite the smoothness of the succession and the warmth of his welcome: the Bye Plot and Main Plot , which led to the arrest of Henry Brooke, Lord Cobham and Walter Raleigh , among others.

[ 97 ] Those hoping for a change in government from James were disappointed at first when he kept Elizabeth's Privy Councillors in office, as secretly planned with Cecil, [ 97 ] but James soon added long-time supporter Henry Howard and his nephew Thomas Howard to the Privy Council, as well as five Scottish nobles.

[ 97 ] [ g ] In the early years of James's reign, the day-to-day running of the government in England was tightly managed by the shrewd Cecil, later Earl of Salisbury , ably assisted by the experienced Thomas Egerton , whom James made Baron Ellesmere and Lord Chancellor , and by Thomas Sackville , soon Earl of Dorset , who continued as Lord Treasurer .

[ 97 ] As a consequence, James was free to concentrate on bigger issues, such as a scheme for a closer union between England and Scotland and matters of foreign policy, as well as to enjoy his leisure pursuits, particularly hunting.

[ 97 ] James was ambitious to build on the personal union of Scotland and England to establish a single country under one monarch, one parliament, and one law, a plan that met opposition from both the Parliament of England and the Parliament of Scotland .

[ 101 ] "Hath He not made us all in one island," James told the English Parliament, "compassed with one sea and of itself by nature indivisible?" In April 1604, however, the Commons refused his request to be titled "King of Great Britain" on legal grounds.

[ h ] In October 1604, he assumed the title "King of Great Britain" instead of "King of England" and "King of Scotland", though Francis Bacon told him that he could not use the style in "any legal proceeding, instrument or assurance" and the title was not used on English statutes.

[ 103 ] James forced the Scottish Parliament to use it, and it was used on proclamations, coinage, letters, and treaties in both realms.

[ 104 ] James achieved more success in foreign policy. Never having been at war with Spain, he devoted his efforts to bringing the long Anglo–Spanish War to an end, and a peace treaty was signed between the two countries in August 1604, thanks to the skilled diplomacy of the delegation, in particular Robert Cecil and Henry Howard, now Earl of Northampton . James celebrated the treaty by hosting a great banquet.

[ 105 ] Freedom of worship for Catholics in England, however, continued to be a major objective of Spanish policy, causing constant dilemmas for James, distrusted abroad for repression of Catholics while at home being encouraged by the Privy Council to show even less tolerance towards them.

[ 106 ] Gunpowder Plot [ edit ] Main article: Gunpowder Plot A dissident Catholic, Guy Fawkes , was discovered in the cellars of the parliament buildings on the night of 4–5 November 1605, the eve of the state opening of the second session of James's first English Parliament. Fawkes was guarding a pile of wood not far from 36 barrels of gunpowder with which he intended to blow up Parliament House the following day and cause the destruction, as James put it, "not only ... of my person, nor of my wife and posterity also, but of the whole body of the State in general".

[ 107 ] The sensational discovery of the "Gunpowder Plot", as it quickly became known, aroused a mood of national relief at the delivery of the king and his sons. The Earl of Salisbury exploited this to extract higher subsidies from the ensuing Parliament than any but one granted to Elizabeth.

[ 108 ] Fawkes and others implicated in the unsuccessful conspiracy were executed.

[ 109 ] King and Parliament [ edit ] Main article: James I of England and the English Parliament The co-operation between monarch and Parliament following the Gunpowder Plot was atypical. Instead, it was the previous session of 1604 that shaped the attitudes of both sides for the rest of the reign, though the initial difficulties owed more to mutual incomprehension than conscious enmity.

[ 110 ] On 7 July 1604, James had angrily prorogued Parliament after failing to win its support either for full union or financial subsidies. "I will not thank where I feel no thanks due", he had remarked in his closing speech. "... I am not of such a stock as to praise fools ... You see how many things you did not well ... I wish you would make use of your liberty with more modesty in time to come".

[ 111 ] As James's reign progressed, his government faced growing financial pressures, partly due to creeping inflation but also to the profligacy and financial incompetence of James's court. In February 1610, Salisbury proposed a scheme, known as the Great Contract , whereby Parliament, in return for ten royal concessions, would grant a lump sum of £600,000 to pay off the king's debts plus an annual grant of £200,000.

[ 112 ] The ensuing prickly negotiations became so protracted that James eventually lost patience and dismissed Parliament on 31 December 1610. "Your greatest error", he told Salisbury, "hath been that ye ever expected to draw honey out of gall".

[ 113 ] The same pattern was repeated with the so-called " Addled Parliament " of 1614, which James dissolved after a mere nine weeks when the Commons hesitated to grant him the money he required.

[ 114 ] James then ruled without parliament until 1621, employing officials such as the merchant Lionel Cranfield , who were astute at raising and saving money for the crown, and sold baronetcies and other dignities, many created for the purpose, as an alternative source of income.

[ 115 ] Spanish match [ edit ] Main article: Spanish match Another potential source of income was the prospect of a Spanish dowry from a marriage between Charles, Prince of Wales, and Infanta Maria Anna of Spain .

[ 116 ] The policy of the Spanish match , as it was called, was also attractive to James as a way to maintain peace with Spain and avoid the additional costs of a war.

[ 117 ] Peace could be maintained as effectively by keeping the negotiations alive as by consummating the match—which may explain why James protracted the negotiations for almost a decade.

[ 118 ] Portrait by Paul van Somer , c.

1620. In the background is the Banqueting House, Whitehall , by architect Inigo Jones , commissioned by James.

The policy was supported by the Howards and other Catholic-leaning ministers and diplomats—together known as the Spanish Party—but deeply distrusted in Protestant England. When Walter Raleigh was released from imprisonment in 1616, he embarked on a hunt for gold in South America with strict instructions from James not to engage the Spanish.

[ 119 ] Raleigh's expedition was a disastrous failure, and his son Walter was killed fighting the Spanish.

[ 120 ] On Raleigh's return to England, James had him executed to the indignation of the public, who opposed the appeasement of Spain.

[ 121 ] James's policy was further jeopardised by the outbreak of the Thirty Years' War , especially after his Protestant son-in-law, Frederick V, Elector Palatine , was ousted from Bohemia by the Catholic Emperor Ferdinand II in 1620, and Spanish troops simultaneously invaded Frederick's Rhineland home territory. Matters came to a head when James finally called a Parliament in 1621 to fund a military expedition in support of his son-in-law.

[ 122 ] The Commons on the one hand granted subsidies inadequate to finance serious military operations in aid of Frederick, [ 123 ] and on the other—remembering the profits gained under Elizabeth by naval attacks on Spanish gold shipments—called for a war directly against Spain. In November 1621, roused by Edward Coke , they framed a petition asking not only for war with Spain but also for Prince Charles to marry a Protestant, and for enforcement of the anti-Catholic laws.

[ 124 ] James flatly told them not to interfere in matters of royal prerogative or they would risk punishment, [ 125 ] which provoked them into issuing a statement protesting their rights, including freedom of speech.

[ 126 ] Urged on by George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham , and the Spanish ambassador Diego Sarmiento de Acuña, Count of Gondomar , James ripped the protest out of the record book and dissolved Parliament.

[ 127 ] In early 1623, Prince Charles, now 22, and Buckingham decided to seize the initiative and travel to Spain incognito, to win Infanta Maria Anna directly, but the mission proved an ineffectual mistake.

[ 128 ] Maria Anna detested Charles, and the Spanish confronted them with terms that included the repeal of anti-Catholic legislation by Parliament. Though a treaty was signed, Charles and Buckingham returned to England in October without the infanta and immediately renounced the treaty, much to the delight of the British people.

[ 129 ] Disillusioned by the visit to Spain, Charles and Buckingham now turned James's Spanish policy upon its head and called for a French match and a war against the Habsburg empire.

[ 130 ] To raise the necessary finance, they prevailed upon James to call another Parliament, which met in February 1624. For once, the outpouring of anti-Catholic sentiment in the Commons was echoed in court, where control of policy was shifting from James to Charles and Buckingham, [ 131 ] who pressured the king to declare war and engineered the impeachment of Lord Treasurer Lionel Cranfield, by now made Earl of Middlesex , when he opposed the plan on grounds of cost.

[ 132 ] The outcome of the Parliament of 1624 was ambiguous: James still refused to declare or fund a war, but Charles believed the Commons had committed themselves to finance a war against Spain, a stance that was to contribute to his problems with Parliament in his own reign.

[ 133 ] King and Church [ edit ] Main article: James VI and I and religious issues After the Gunpowder Plot, James sanctioned harsh measures to control English Catholics. In May 1606, Parliament passed the Popish Recusants Act , which could require any subject to take an Oath of Allegiance denying the pope's authority over the king.

[ 134 ] James was conciliatory towards Catholics who took the Oath of Allegiance, [ 135 ] and tolerated crypto-Catholicism even at court.

[ i ] Henry Howard, for example, was a crypto-Catholic, received back into the Catholic Church in his final months.

[ 136 ] On ascending the English throne, James suspected that he might need the support of Catholics in England, so he assured Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland , a prominent sympathiser of the old religion, that he would not persecute "any that will be quiet and give but an outward obedience to the law".

[ 137 ] In the Millenary Petition of 1603, the Puritan clergy demanded the abolition of confirmation , wedding rings, and the term "priest", among other things, and that the wearing of cap and surplice become optional.

[ 138 ] James was strict in enforcing conformity at first, inducing a sense of persecution amongst many Puritans; [ 139 ] but ejections and suspensions from livings became rarer as the reign continued.

[ 140 ] As a result of the Hampton Court Conference of 1604, some Puritan demands were acceded to in the 1604 Book of Common Prayer , though many remained displeased.

[ 4 ] [ 141 ] The conference also commissioned a new translation and compilation of approved books of the Bible to resolve discrepancies among different translations then being used. The King James Version , as it came to be known, was completed in 1611 and is considered a masterpiece of Jacobean prose.

[ 142 ] [ 143 ] It is still in widespread use.

[ 142 ] In Scotland, James attempted to bring the Scottish Kirk "so neir as can be" to the English church and to reestablish episcopacy , a policy that met with strong opposition from presbyterians .

[ j ] James returned to Scotland in 1617 for the only time after his accession in England, in the hope of implementing Anglican ritual. James's bishops forced his Five Articles of Perth through a General Assembly the following year, but the rulings were widely resisted.

[ 145 ] James left the church in Scotland divided at his death, a source of future problems for his son.

[ k ] Personal relationships [ edit ] Main article: Sexuality of James VI and I Robert Carr, 1st Earl of Somerset (left), and George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham , are both said to have been James's lovers.

Throughout his life James had close relationships with male courtiers, which has caused debate among historians about their exact nature.

[ 147 ] In Scotland Anne Murray was known as the king's mistress.

[ 148 ] After his accession in England, his peaceful and scholarly attitude contrasted strikingly with the bellicose and flirtatious behaviour of Elizabeth, [ 147 ] as indicated by the contemporary epigram Rex fuit Elizabeth, nunc est regina Iacobus (Elizabeth was King, now James is Queen).

[ 149 ] Some of James's biographers conclude that Esmé Stewart, 1st Duke of Lennox ; Robert Carr, 1st Earl of Somerset ; and George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham , were his lovers.

[ 150 ] John Oglander observed that he "never yet saw any fond husband make so much or so great dalliance over his beautiful spouse as I have seen King James over his favourites, especially the Duke of Buckingham" [ 151 ] whom the king would, recalled Sir Edward Peyton , "tumble and kiss as a mistress".

[ 152 ] Restoration of Apethorpe Palace , Northamptonshire, undertaken in 2004–08 revealed a previously unknown passage linking the bedchambers of James and Villiers.

[ 153 ] Some biographers of James argue that the relationships were not sexual.

[ 154 ] James's Basilikon Doron lists sodomy among crimes "ye are bound in conscience never to forgive", and James's wife Anne gave birth to seven live children, as well as suffering two stillbirths and at least three other miscarriages.

[ 155 ] Contemporary Huguenot poet Théophile de Viau observed that "it is well known that the king of England / fucks the Duke of Buckingham".

[ 156 ] [ l ] Buckingham himself provides evidence that he slept in the same bed as the king, writing to James many years later that he had pondered "whether you loved me now ... better than at the time which I shall never forget at Farnham, where the bed's head could not be found between the master and his dog".

[ 158 ] Buckingham's words may be interpreted as non-sexual, in the context of 17th-century court life, [ 159 ] and remain ambiguous despite their fondness.

[ 160 ] It is also possible that James was bisexual.

[ 161 ] When the Earl of Salisbury died in 1612, he was little mourned by those who jostled to fill the power vacuum.

[ m ] Until Salisbury's death, the Elizabethan administrative system over which he had presided continued to function with relative efficiency; from this time forward, however, James's government entered a period of decline and disrepute.

[ 163 ] Salisbury's passing gave James the notion of governing in person as his own chief Minister of State, with his young Scottish favourite Robert Carr carrying out many of Salisbury's former duties, but James's inability to attend closely to official business exposed the government to factionalism.

[ 164 ] The Howard party (consisting of Henry Howard, Earl of Northampton; Thomas Howard, Earl of Suffolk; Suffolk's son-in-law William Knollys, Lord Knollys ; Charles Howard, Earl of Nottingham ; and Thomas Lake ) soon took control of much of the government and its patronage. Even the powerful Carr fell into the Howard camp, hardly experienced for the responsibilities thrust upon him and often dependent on his intimate friend Thomas Overbury for assistance with government papers.

[ 165 ] Carr had an adulterous affair with Frances Howard, Countess of Essex , daughter of the Earl of Suffolk. James assisted Frances by securing an annulment of her marriage to free her to marry Carr, now Earl of Somerset.

[ n ] In summer 1615, however, it emerged that Overbury had been poisoned. He had died on 15 September 1613 in the Tower of London, where he had been placed at the king's request.

[ 167 ] [ o ] Among those convicted of the murder were the Earl and Countess of Somerset; the Earl had been replaced as the king's favourite in the meantime by Villiers. James pardoned the Countess and commuted the Earl's sentence of death, eventually pardoning him in 1624.

[ 170 ] The implication of the king in such a scandal provoked much public and literary conjecture and irreparably tarnished James's court with an image of corruption and depravity.

[ 171 ] The subsequent downfall of the Howards left Villiers unchallenged as the supreme figure in the government by 1619.

[ 172 ] Health and death [ edit ] Main article: Death and funeral of James VI and I Portrait by Daniël Mijtens , 1621, in the National Portrait Gallery In his later years, James suffered increasingly from arthritis , gout and kidney stones .

[ 54 ] [ 173 ] He also lost his teeth and drank heavily.

[ 54 ] [ 174 ] The king was often seriously ill during the last year of his life, leaving him an increasingly peripheral figure, rarely able to visit London, while Buckingham consolidated his control of Charles to ensure his own future.

[ p ] One theory is that James suffered from porphyria , a disease of which his descendant George III exhibited some symptoms. James described his urine to physician Théodore de Mayerne as being the "dark red colour of Alicante wine".

[ 177 ] The theory is dismissed by some experts, particularly in James's case, because he had kidney stones which can lead to blood in the urine , colouring it red.

[ 178 ] In early 1625, James was plagued by severe attacks of arthritis, gout, and fainting fits, and fell seriously ill in March with tertian ague and then suffered a stroke. He died at Theobalds House in Hertfordshire on 27 March during a violent attack of dysentery , with Buckingham at his bedside.

[ q ] James's funeral on 7 May was a magnificent but disorderly affair.

[ 180 ] Bishop John Williams of Lincoln preached the sermon, observing, "King Solomon died in Peace, when he had lived about sixty years ... and so you know did King James". The sermon was later printed as Great Britain's Salomon [ sic ].

[ 181 ] James was buried in Westminster Abbey . The position of the tomb was lost for many years until his lead coffin was found in the Henry VII vault, during an excavation in the 19th century.

[ 182 ] Legacy [ edit ] See also: Cultural depictions of James VI and I On the ceiling of the Banqueting House, Rubens depicted James being carried to heaven by angels.

James was widely mourned. For all his flaws, he had largely retained the affection of his people, who had enjoyed uninterrupted peace and comparatively low taxation during the Jacobean era. "As he lived in peace", remarked the Earl of Kellie , "so did he die in peace, and I pray God our king [Charles I] may follow him".

[ 183 ] The Earl prayed in vain: once in power, King Charles I and the Duke of Buckingham sanctioned a series of reckless military expeditions that ended in humiliating failure.

[ 184 ] James had often neglected the business of government for leisure pastimes, such as the hunt; his later dependence on favourites at a scandal-ridden court undermined the respected image of monarchy so carefully constructed by Elizabeth I.

[ 185 ] Under James, the Plantation of Ulster by English and Scots Protestants began, and the English colonisation of North America started its course with the foundation of Jamestown, Virginia , in 1607 [ 186 ] and Cuper's Cove, Newfoundland , in 1610. During the next 150 years, England would fight with Spain, the Netherlands, and France for control of the continent, while religious division in Ireland between Protestants and Catholics has lasted for 400 years . By actively pursuing more than just a personal union of his realms, James helped lay the foundations for a unitary British state.

[ 187 ] According to a tradition originating with anti- Stuart historians of the mid-17th-century, James's taste for political absolutism , his financial irresponsibility, and his cultivation of unpopular favourites established the foundations of the English Civil War . James bequeathed his son Charles a fatal belief in the divine right of kings , combined with a disdain for Parliament, which culminated in the execution of Charles I and the abolition of the monarchy . Over the last three hundred years, the king's reputation has suffered from the acid description of him by Anthony Weldon , whom James had sacked and who wrote treatises on James in the 1650s.

[ 188 ] Other influential anti-James histories written during the 1650s include: Edward Peyton 's Divine Catastrophe of the Kingly Family of the House of Stuarts (1652); Arthur Wilson 's History of Great Britain, Being the Life and Reign of King James I (1658); and Francis Osborne 's Historical Memoirs of the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James (1658).

[ 189 ] David Harris Willson 's 1956 biography continued much of this hostility.

[ 100 ] [ 190 ] In the words of historian Jenny Wormald , Willson's book was an "astonishing spectacle of a work whose every page proclaimed its author's increasing hatred for his subject".

[ 191 ] Since Willson, however, the stability of James's government in Scotland and in the early part of his English reign, as well as his relatively enlightened views on religion and war, have earned him a re-evaluation from many historians, who have rescued his reputation from this tradition of criticism.

[ r ] Representative of the new historical perspective is the 2003 biography by Pauline Croft . Reviewer John Cramsie summarises her findings: Croft's overall assessment of James is appropriately mixed. She recognises his good intentions in matters like Anglo-Scottish union, his openness to different points of view, and his agenda of a peaceful foreign policy within his kingdoms' financial means. His actions moderated frictions between his diverse peoples. Yet he also created new ones, particularly by supporting colonisation that polarised the crown's interest groups in Ireland, obtaining insufficient political benefit with his open-handed patronage, an unfortunate lack of attention to the image of monarchy (particularly after the image-obsessed regime of Elizabeth), pursuing a pro-Spanish foreign policy that fired religious prejudice and opened the door for Arminians within the English church, and enforcing unpalatable religious changes on the Scottish Kirk. Many of these criticisms are framed within a longer view of James' reigns, including the legacy—now understood to be more troubled—which he left Charles I.

[ 193 ] Titles, styles, honours, and arms [ edit ] Titles and styles [ edit ] In Scotland, James was "James the sixth, King of Scotland", until 1604. He was proclaimed "James the first, King of England, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith " in London on 24 March 1603.

[ 194 ] On 20 October 1604, James issued a proclamation at Westminster changing his style to "King of Great Brittaine, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c." [ 195 ] The style was not used on English statutes, but was used on proclamations, coinage, letters, treaties, and in Scotland.

[ 196 ] James styled himself "King of France", in line with other monarchs of England between 1340 and 1801 , although he did not actually rule France.

Arms [ edit ] As King of Scotland, James bore the ancient royal arms of Scotland : Or , a lion rampant Gules armed and langued Azure within a double tressure flory counter-flory Gules. The arms were supported by two unicorns Argent armed, crined and unguled Proper, gorged with a coronet Or composed of crosses patée and fleurs de lys a chain affixed thereto passing between the forelegs and reflexed over the back also Or. The crest was a lion sejant affrontée Gules, imperially crowned Or, holding in the dexter paw a sword and in the sinister paw a sceptre both erect and Proper.

[ 197 ] The Union of the Crowns of England and Scotland under James was symbolised heraldically by combining their arms, supporters and badges . Contention as to how the arms should be marshalled , and to which kingdom should take precedence, was solved by having different arms for each country.

[ 198 ] The arms used in England were: Quarterly, I and IV, quarterly 1st and 4th Azure three fleurs de lys Or (for France), 2nd and 3rd Gules three lions passant guardant in pale Or ( for England ); II Or a lion rampant within a tressure flory-counter-flory Gules (for Scotland); III Azure a harp Or stringed Argent ( for Ireland , this was the first time that Ireland was included in the royal arms).

[ 199 ] The supporters became: dexter a lion rampant guardant Or imperially crowned and sinister the Scottish unicorn. The unicorn replaced the red dragon introduced by the Tudors. The unicorn has remained in the royal arms of the two united realms . The English crest and motto was retained. The compartment often contained a branch of the Tudor rose, with shamrock and thistle engrafted on the same stem. The arms were frequently shown with James's personal motto, Beati pacifici .

[ 198 ] The arms used in Scotland were: Quarterly, I and IV Scotland, II England and France, III Ireland, with Scotland taking precedence over England. The supporters were: dexter a unicorn of Scotland imperially crowned, supporting a tilting lance flying a banner Azure a saltire Argent ( Cross of Saint Andrew ) and sinister the crowned lion of England supporting a similar lance flying a banner Argent a cross Gules ( Cross of Saint George ). The Scottish crest and motto was retained, following the Scottish practice the motto In defens (which is short for In My Defens God Me Defend ) was placed above the crest.

[ 198 ] As royal badges James used: the Tudor rose, the thistle (for Scotland; first used by James III of Scotland ), the Tudor rose dimidiated with the thistle ensigned with the royal crown, a harp (for Ireland) and a fleur de lys (for France).

[ 199 ] Coat of arms used from 1567 to 1603 Coat of arms used from 1603 to 1625 outside Scotland Coat of arms used from 1603 to 1625 in Scotland Issue [ edit ] James I and his royal progeny by Charles Turner, from a mezzotint by Samuel Woodburn (1814), after Willem de Passe James's queen, Anne of Denmark, gave birth to seven children who survived beyond birth, of whom three reached adulthood: [ 200 ] Henry Frederick, Prince of Wales (19 February 1594 – 6 November 1612). Died, probably of typhoid fever , aged 18.

[ 201 ] Elizabeth, Queen of Bohemia (19 August 1596 – 13 February 1662). Married 1613 Frederick V, Elector Palatine . Died aged 65.

Margaret (24 December 1598 – March 1600). Died aged 1.

Charles I, King of England, Scotland and Ireland (19 November 1600 – 30 January 1649). Married 1625 Henrietta Maria of France . Succeeded James I & VI.

Robert, Duke of Kintyre (18 January 1602 – 27 May 1602). Died aged 4 months.

[ 202 ] Mary (8 April 1605 – 16 December 1607). Died aged 2.

Sophia (June 1606). Died within 48 hours of birth.

[ 203 ] Family tree [ edit ] James's relationship to the houses of Stuart and Tudor [ 204 ] House of Stuart James II, King of Scots Mary of Guelders James III, King of Scots Mary Stewart Elizabeth Hamilton House of Tudor John Stewart Henry VII, King of England James IV, King of Scotland Margaret Tudor Archibald Douglas Henry VIII, King of England James V, King of Scotland Matthew Stewart Margaret Douglas Mary I, Queen of England Elizabeth I, Queen of England Edward VI, King of England Mary, Queen of Scots Henry Stuart James VI & I, King of Scotland and England Ancestry [ edit ] Ancestors of James VI and I 8.

John Stewart, 3rd Earl of Lennox 4.

Matthew Stewart, 4th Earl of Lennox 9.

Elizabeth Stewart 2.

Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley 10.

Archibald Douglas, 6th Earl of Angus 5.

Margaret Douglas 11.

Margaret Tudor = 13 1.

James VI and I 12.

James IV of Scotland 6.

James V of Scotland 13.

Margaret Tudor = 11 3.

Mary, Queen of Scots 14.

Claude, Duke of Guise 7.

Mary of Guise 15.

Antoinette of Bourbon List of writings [ edit ] The Essayes of a Prentise in the Divine Art of Poesie (also called Some Reulis and Cautelis ), 1584 His Majesties Poeticall Exercises at Vacant Houres , 1591 Lepanto , poem Daemonologie , 1597 Extra-titular Works from the Collected Demonology , 1616 A Letter To The Whole Church Militant , The Argument Of This Whole Epistle , A Paraphrase Upon The Revelation , The Two Meditations The True Law of Free Monarchies , 1598 Basilikon Doron , 1599 A Counterblaste to Tobacco , 1604, a strong denunciation of tobacco An Apologie for the Oath of Allegiance , 1608 A Premonition to All Most Mightie Monarches , 1609 Notes [ edit ] ^ As the Earl of Bedford was a Protestant, his place in the ceremony was taken by Jean, Countess of Argyll .

[ 11 ] ^ Elizabeth I wrote to Mary: "My ears have been so astounded, my mind so disturbed and my heart so appalled at hearing the horrible report of the abominable murder of your late husband and my slaughtered cousin, that I can scarcely as yet summon the spirit to write about it ... I will not conceal from you that people for the most part are saying that you will look through your fingers at this deed instead of avenging it and that you don't care to take action against those who have done you this pleasure." Historian John Guy nonetheless concludes: "Not a single piece of uncontaminated evidence has ever been found to show that Mary had foreknowledge of Darnley's murder".

[ 14 ] In historian David Harris Willson's view, however: "That Bothwell was the murderer no one can doubt; and that Mary was his accomplice seems equally certain." [ 15 ] ^ James's captors forced from him a proclamation, dated 30 August, declaring that he was not being held prisoner "forced or constrained, for fear or terror, or against his will", and that no one should come to his aid as a result of "seditious or contrary reports".

[ 34 ] ^ James briefly broke off diplomatic relations with England over Mary's execution, but he wrote privately that Scotland "could never have been without factions if she had beene left alive".

[ 42 ] ^ James heard on 7 October of the decision to postpone the crossing for winter.

[ 49 ] ^ James described Cecil as "king there in effect".

[ 86 ] ^ The introduction of Henry Howard (soon Earl of Northampton) and of Thomas Howard (soon Earl of Suffolk) marked the beginning of the rise of the Howard family to power in England, which culminated in their dominance of James's government after the death of Cecil in 1612. Henry Howard, son of poet Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey , had been a diligent correspondent with James in advance of the succession (James referred to him as "long approved and trusted Howard"). His connection with James may have owed something to the attempt by his brother Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk , to free and marry Mary, Queen of Scots, leading to his execution in 1572.

[ 98 ] For details on the Howards, see The Trials of Frances Howard by David Lindley. Henry Howard is a traditionally reviled figure (Willson [1956] called him "A man of dark counsels and creeping schemes, learned but bombastic, and a most fulsome flatterer" [ 99 ] ) whose reputation was upgraded by Linda Levy Peck's 1982 biography Northampton .

[ 100 ] ^ English and Scot, James insisted, should "join and coalesce together in a sincere and perfect union, as two twins bred in one belly, to love one another as no more two but one estate".

[ 102 ] ^ A crypto-Catholic was someone who outwardly conformed to Protestantism but remained a Catholic in private.

^ In March 1605, Archbishop Spottiswood wrote to James warning him that sermons against bishops were being preached daily in Edinburgh.

[ 144 ] ^ Assessments of the Kirk at James's death are divided. Some historians argue that the Scots might have accepted James's policies eventually, others that James left the Kirk in crisis.

[ 146 ] ^ In the original: Et ce savant roy d'Angleterre / foutoit-il pas le Boukinquan .

[ 157 ] ^ Northampton assumed the day-to-day running of government business, and spoke of "the death of the little man for which so many rejoice and few do as much as seem to be sorry." [ 162 ] ^ The commissioners judging the case reached a 5–5 verdict, so James quickly appointed two extra judges guaranteed to vote in favour, an intervention which aroused public censure. When Thomas Bilson (son of Bishop Bilson of Winchester , one of the added commissioners) was knighted after the annulment, he was given the nickname "Sir Nullity Bilson".

[ 166 ] ^ It is very likely that Overbury was the victim of a 'set-up' contrived by the earls of Northampton and Suffolk, with Carr's complicity, to keep him out of the way during the annulment proceedings. Overbury knew too much of Carr's dealings with Frances and he opposed the match with a fervour that made him dangerous, motivated by a deep political hostility to the Howards. It cannot have been difficult to secure James's compliance, because he disliked Overbury and his influence over Carr.

[ 168 ] John Chamberlain reported that the king "hath long had a desire to remove him from about the lord of Rochester, as thinking it a dishonour to him that the world should have an opinion that Rochester ruled him and Overbury ruled Rochester".

[ 169 ] ^ Some historians (for example Willson) consider James, who was 58 in 1624, to have lapsed into premature senility; [ 175 ] but he suffered from an agonising species of arthritis which constantly left him indisposed, as well as other ailments; and Pauline Croft suggests that James regained some control over his affairs in summer 1624, afforded relief by the warm weather. She sees his continuing refusal to sanction war against Spain as a deliberate stand against the aggressive policies of Charles and Buckingham.

[ 176 ] ^ A medicine recommended by Buckingham had only served to make the king worse, which led to rumours that the duke had poisoned him.

[ 179 ] ^ In recent decades, much scholarship has emphasised James's success in Scotland (though there have been partial dissenters, such as Michael Lynch ), and there is an emerging appreciation of James's successes in the early part of his reign in England.

[ 192 ] References [ edit ] ^ Milling 2004 , p. 155.

^ Fischlin & Fortier 2002 , p. 39 ^ Rhodes, Richards & Marshall 2003 , p. 1: "James VI and I was the most writerly of British monarchs. He produced original poetry, as well as translation and a treatise on poetics; works on witchcraft and tobacco; meditations and commentaries on the Scriptures ; a manual on kingship; works of political theory ; and, of course, speeches to parliament ... He was the patron of Shakespeare, Jonson, Donne, and the translators of the "Authorized version" of the Bible, surely the greatest concentration of literary talent ever to enjoy royal sponsorship in England." ^ a b Cummings, Brian , ed. (2011).

The Book of Common Prayer: The Texts of 1549, 1559, and 1662 .

Oxford World's Classics .

Oxford : Oxford University Press . p. 737.

^ Smith 2003 , p. 238: "The label 'the wisest fool in Christendom', often attributed to Henry IV of France but possibly coined by Anthony Weldon, catches James's paradoxical qualities very neatly"; Anthony Weldon (1651), The Court and Character of King James I , quoted by Stroud 1999 , p. 27: "A very wise man was wont to say that he believed him the wisest fool in Christendom, meaning him wise in small things, but a fool in weighty affairs." ^ Croft 2003 , p. 6: "Historians have returned to reconsidering James as a serious and intelligent ruler"; Lockyer 1998 , pp. 4–6; Smith 2003 , p. 238: "In contrast to earlier historians, recent research on his reign has tended to emphasize the wisdom and downplay the foolishness".

^ Davies 1959 , pp. 47–57 ^ Guy 2004 , pp. 236–237, 241–242, 270; Willson 1963 , p. 13.

^ Guy 2004 , pp. 248–250; Willson 1963 , p. 16.

^ Joseph Bain, Calendar State Papers Scotland , vol. 2 (Edinburgh, 1900), p. 290.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 17.

^ Donaldson 1974 , p. 99.

^ Thomson 1827 , pp. 171–172.

^ Guy 2004 , pp. 312–313.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 18.

^ Guy 2004 , pp. 364–365; Willson 1963 , p. 19.

^ Letter of Mary to Mar, 29 March 1567, quoted by Stewart 2003 , p. 27: "Suffer nor admit no noblemen of our realm or any others, of what condition soever they be of, to enter or come within our said Castle or to the presence of our said dearest son, with any more persons but two or three at the most." ^ Stewart 2003 , p. 33; Willson 1963 , p. 18.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 11.

^ Courtney 2024 , p. 18.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 19.

^ Croft 2003 , pp. 12–13.

^ Croft 2003 , pp. 13, 18.

^ Spottiswoode, John (1851), History of the Church in Scotland , Edinburgh: Oliver & Boyd, vol. 2, p. 120 .

^ Croft 2003 , p. 13.

^ Thomson 1827 , pp. 248–249.

^ Stewart 2003 , p. 45; Willson 1963 , pp. 28–29.

^ a b Croft 2003 , p. 15.

^ Lockyer 1998 , pp. 11–12; Stewart 2003 , pp. 51–63.

^ Wiggins, Martin; Richardson, Catherine (2012).

British Drama 1533–1642: A Catalogue . Vol. II: 1567–1589. Oxford University Press, USA. pp.

242– 244.

ISBN 978-0-1992-6572-5 .

OL 25969471M .

^ David Calderwood quoted by Stewart 2003 , p. 63: "So ended this nobleman, one of the chief instruments of the reformation; a defender of the same, and of the King in his minority, for the which he is now unthankfully dealt with." ^ Stewart 2003 , p. 63.

^ Lockyer 1998 , pp. 13–15; Willson 1963 , p. 35.

^ Stewart 2003 , p. 66.

^ Law 1904 , pp.

295, 297 .

^ "Ruthven, William", by T. F. Henderson, in Dictionary of National Biography , Volume 50 (Smith, Elder, & Co., 1897) ^ Croft 2003 , pp. 17–18; Willson 1963 , pp. 39, 50.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 20.

^ Croft 2003 , pp. 29, 41–42; Willson 1963 , pp. 121–124.

^ Lockyer 1998 , pp. 24–25; Stewart 2003 , pp. 150–157.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 45; George Nicolson quoted by Stewart 2003 , p. 154: "It is begun to be noted that the reports coming from the King should differ"; Williams 1970 , p. 61: "The two principal characters were dead, the evidence of eyewitnesses was destroyed and only King James's version remained"; Willson 1963 , pp. 126–130.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 22.

^ Lockyer 1998 , pp. 29–31; Willson 1963 , p. 52.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 23.

^ Goodare, Julian (2000). "James VI's English Subsidy". In Goodare, Julian; Lynch, Michael (eds.).

The Reign of James VI . East Linton: Tuckwell. p. 115.

^ Croft 2003 , pp. 23–24.

^ Courtney 2024 , p. 114.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 85.

^ Stewart 2003 , pp. 107–110.

^ Kerr-Peterson, Miles; Pearce, Michael (2020).

James VI's English Subsidy and Danish Dowry Accounts, 1588–1596 . Scottish History Society Miscellany XVI. Woodbridge. p. 35.

^ Stevenson, David (1997).

Scotland's Last Royal Wedding . Edinburgh: John Donald. pp.

99– 100.

^ Willson 1963 , pp. 85–95.

^ Pearce 2022 , pp. 108–123.

^ a b c Croft 2003 , p. 101.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 26.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 103.

^ Willumsen, Liv Helene (1 December 2020).

"Witchcraft against Royal Danish Ships in 1589 and the Transnational Transfer of Ideas" .

International Review of Scottish Studies .

45 : 54– 99.

doi : 10.21083/irss.v45i0.5801 .

hdl : 10037/20205 .

ISSN 1923-5755 .

S2CID 229451135 – via www.irss.uoguelph.ca.

^ a b Keay & Keay 1994 , p. 556.

^ Willson 1963 , pp. 103–105.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 27; Lockyer 1998 , p. 21; Willson 1963 , pp. 105, 308–309.

^ Akrigg 1984 , p. 220; Willson 1963 , p. 309.

^ Hunter 2000 , pp. 143, 166.

^ Hunter 2000 , p. 174.

^ Thompson 1968 , pp. 40–41.

^ Hunter 2000 , p. 175.

^ Thompson 1968 , pp. 40–41; Hunter 2000 , p. 175 ^ Hunter 2000 , p. 175; Rotary Club of Stornoway 1995 , pp. 12–13 ^ Hunter 2000 , p. 176.

^ MacKinnon 1991 , p. 46.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 139; Lockyer 1998 , p. 179 ^ a b Willson 1963 , p. 321.

^ James quoted by Willson 1963 , p. 131: "Kings are called gods by the prophetical King David because they sit upon God His throne in earth and have the count of their administration to give unto Him." ^ Croft 2003 , pp. 131–133.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 133.

^ Croft 2003 , pp. 134–135: "James wrote well, scattering engaging asides throughout the text"; Willson 1963 , p. 132: " Basilikon Doron is the best prose James ever wrote".

^ Croft 2003 , p. 133.

^ Quoted by Willson 1963 , p. 132.

^ Jack 1988 , pp. 126–127.

^ See: Jack, R. D. S.

(2000), " Scottish Literature: 1603 and all that Archived 11 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine ", Association for Scottish Literary Studies , retrieved 18 October 2011.

^ Jack, R. D. S.

(1985), Alexander Montgomerie , Edinburgh: Scottish Academic Press, pp. 1–2.

^ Jack 1988 , p. 125.

^ Jack 1988 , p. 137.

^ Spiller, Michael (1988), "Poetry after the Union 1603–1660", in Craig, Cairns (general editor), The History of Scottish Literature , Aberdeen University Press, vol. 1, pp. 141–152. Spiller points out that the trend, although unambiguous, was generally more mixed.

^ See for example Rhodes, Neil (2004), "Wrapped in the Strong Arm of the Union: Shakespeare and King James", in Maley, Willy; Murphy, Andrew (eds), Shakespeare and Scotland , Manchester University Press, pp. 38–39.

^ Jack 1988 , pp. 137–138.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 48.

^ Lockyer 1998 , pp. 161–162; Willson 1963 , pp. 154–155.

^ a b Croft 2003 , p. 49.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 158.

^ Courtney 2024 , p. 239.

^ Martin 2016 , p. 315; Willson 1963 , pp. 160–164.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 50.

^ Stewart 2003 , p. 169.

^ Stewart 2003 , p. 172; Willson 1963 , p. 165.

^ Stewart 2003 , p. 173.

^ Croft 2003 , pp. 50–51.

^ a b c d e Croft 2003 , p. 51.

^ Guy 2004 , pp. 461–468; Willson 1963 , p. 156.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 156.

^ a b Croft 2003 , p. 6.

^ Croft 2003 , pp. 52–54.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 250.

^ Willson 1963 , pp. 249–253.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 67; Willson 1963 , pp. 249–253.

^ Croft 2003 , pp. 52–53.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 118.

^ Stewart 2003 , p. 219.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 64.

^ Nicholls, Mark (2004). "Rookwood, Ambrose (c. 1578–1606)".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography .

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/24066 . Retrieved 13 August 2022 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ Croft 2003 , p. 63.

^ Quoted by Croft 2003 , p. 62.

^ Croft 2003 , pp. 75–81.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 80; Lockyer 1998 , p. 167; Willson 1963 , p. 267.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 93; Willson 1963 , p. 348.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 409.

^ Willson 1963 , pp. 348, 357.

^ Schama 2001 , p. 59.

^ Kenyon, J. P.

(1978).

Stuart England . Harmondsworth, England: Penguin Books. pp. 88–89.

^ Willson 1963 , pp. 369–370.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 104; Willson 1963 , pp. 372–373.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 374–377.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 408–416.

^ Lockyer 1998 , p. 148; Willson 1963 , p. 417.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 421.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 422.

^ James quoted by Willson 1963 , p. 423: "We cannot with patience endure our subjects to use such anti-monarchical words to us concerning their liberties, except they had subjoined that they were granted unto them by the grace and favour of our predecessors." ^ Willson 1963 , p. 243.

^ Croft 2003 , pp. 118–119; Willson 1963 , pp. 431–435.

^ Cogswell 2005 , pp. 224–225, 243, 281–299; Croft 2003 , p. 120; Schama 2001 , p. 64.

^ Croft 2003 , pp. 120–121.

^ Krugler 2004 , pp. 63–64: "The aging monarch was no match for the two men closest to him. By the end of the year, the prince and the royal favourite spoke openly against the Spanish marriage and pressured James to call a parliament to consider their now repugnant treaties ... with hindsight ... the prince's return from Madrid marked the end of the king's reign. The prince and the favourite encouraged popular anti-Spanish sentiments to commandeer control of foreign and domestic policy".

^ Croft 2003 , p. 125; Lockyer 1998 , p. 195.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 126: "On that divergence of interpretation, relations between the future king and the Parliaments of the years 1625–9 were to founder".

^ Stewart 2003 , p. 225.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 228.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 162.

^ Akrigg 1984 , pp. 207–208; Willson 1963 , pp. 148–149.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 201.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 156; Stewart 2003 , p. 205: "In seeking conformity, James gave a name and a purpose to nonconformity"; Basilikon Doron quoted by Willson 1963 , pp. 201, 209: "In things indifferent, they are seditious which obey not the magistrates".

^ Croft 2003 , p. 158.

^ Spinks, Bryan D. (2006). "Anglicans and Dissenters". In Wainwright, Geoffrey; Westerfield Tucker, Karen B.

(eds.).

The Oxford History of Christian Worship .

Oxford : Oxford University Press . pp.

503– 504.

ISBN 978-0-1951-3886-3 .

^ a b Croft 2003 , p. 157.

^ Willson 1963 , pp. 213–215.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 164.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 166; Lockyer 1998 , pp. 185–186; Willson 1963 , p. 320.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 167.

^ a b Bucholz & Key 2004 , p. 208: "... his sexuality has long been a matter of debate. He clearly preferred the company of handsome young men. The evidence of his correspondence and contemporary accounts have led some historians to conclude that the king was homosexual or bisexual . In fact, the issue is murky." ^ Bain, Joseph (1894), Calendar of letters and papers relating to the affairs of the borders of England and Scotland , vol. 2, Edinburgh: Creative Media Partners, pp.

30– 31, 44, ISBN 978-1-0157-9859-5 , OL 46169615M {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Hyde, H. Montgomery (1970).

The Love That Dared Not Speak its Name . London: Heinemann. pp.

43– 44.

^ e.g.

Young, Michael B. (2000), King James and the History of Homosexuality , New York University Press, ISBN 978-0-8147-9693-1 ; Bergeron, David M. (1991), Royal Family, Royal Lovers: King James of England and Scotland , University of Missouri Press, ISBN 0826207839 ; Murphy, Timothy (2011), Reader's Guide To Gay & Lesbian Studies , Routledge Dearborn Publishers, p. 314, ISBN 9781579581428 .

^ Bergeron, David M. (1999).

King James and Letters of Homoerotic Desire . Iowa City: University of Iowa Press. p. 348.

^ Ruigh, Robert E. (1971).

The Parliament of 1624: Politics and Foreign Policy . Harvard University Press. p. 77.

^ Graham, Fiona (5 June 2008).

"To the manor bought" .

BBC News . Retrieved 18 October 2008 .

^ e.g.

Lee, Maurice (1990), Great Britain's Solomon: James VI and I in his Three Kingdoms , Urbana: University of Illinois Press, ISBN 978-0-2520-1686-8 .

^ Lockyer 1981 , pp. 19, 21; Weir, Alison (1996).

Britain's Royal Families: The Complete Genealogy . Random House. pp.

249– 251.

ISBN 0-7126-7448-9 .

^ Norton, Rictor (8 January 2000), "Queen James and His Courtiers" , Gay History and Literature , retrieved 9 December 2015 .

^ Gaudiani, Claire Lynn (1981), The Cabaret poetry of Théophile de Viau: Texts and Traditions , Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag, pp.

103– 104, ISBN 978-3-8780-8892-9 , retrieved 9 December 2015 .

^ Lockyer 1981 , p. 22.

^ Bray, Alan (2003).

The Friend . University of Chicago Press. pp.

167– 170.

ISBN 0-2260-7180-4 .

; Bray, Alan (1994). "Homosexuality and the Signs of Male Friendship in Elizabethan England". In Goldberg, Jonathan (ed.).

Queering the Renaissance . Duke University Press. pp.

42– 44.

ISBN 0-8223-1385-5 .

^ Ackroyd, Peter (2014).

The History of England . Vol. III: Civil War. Macmillan. p. 45.

ISBN 978-0-2307-0641-5 .

; Miller, John (2004).

The Stuarts . Hambledon. p. 38.

ISBN 1-8528-5432-4 .

^ Dabiri, Emma.

"Filled with 'a number of male lovelies': the surprising court of King James VI and I" .

BBC Scotland . BBC . Retrieved 28 August 2020 .

^ Willson 1963 , p. 269.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 333: "Finances fell into chaos, foreign affairs became more difficult. James exalted a worthless favourite and increased the power of the Howards. As government relaxed and honour cheapened, we enter a period of decline and weakness, of intrigue, scandal, confusion and treachery." ^ Willson 1963 , pp. 334–335.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 349; Francis Bacon , speaking at Carr's trial, quoted by Perry 2006 , p. 105: "Packets were sent, sometimes opened by my lord, sometimes unbroken unto Overbury, who perused them, registered them, made table-talk of them, as they thought good. So I will undertake the time was, when Overbury knew more of the secrets of state, than the council-table did." ^ Lindley 1993 , p. 120.

^ Barroll 2001 , p. 136: "Rumours of foul play involving Rochester and his wife with Overbury had, however, been circulating since his death. Indeed, almost two years later, in September 1615, and as James was in the process of replacing Rochester with a new favourite, George Villiers, the Governor of the Tower of London sent a letter to the king informing him that one of the warders in the days before Overbury had been found dead had been bringing the prisoner poisoned food and medicine"; Lindley 1993 , p. 146.

^ Lindley 1993 , p. 145.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 342.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 91.

^ Davies 1959 , p. 20: "Probably no single event, prior to the attempt to arrest the five members in 1642, did more to lessen the general reverence with which royalty was regarded in England than this unsavoury episode." ^ Croft 2003 , pp. 98–99; Willson 1963 , p. 397.

^ Willson 1963 , pp. 378, 404.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 379.

^ Willson 1963 , p. 425.

^ Croft 2003 , pp. 126–127; Croft 2003 , p. 101: "James never became a cypher"; Lockyer 1998 , p. 174: "During the last eighteen months of his life James fought a very effective rearguard action to preserve his control of foreign policy ... he never became a cypher." ^ Röhl, John C. G.

; Warren, Martin; Hunt, David (1998), Purple Secret: Genes, "Madness" and the Royal Houses of Europe , London: Bantam Press, ISBN 0-5930-4148-8 .

^ e.g. Dean, Geoffrey (2002), The Turnstone: A Doctor's Story ., Liverpool University Press, pp. 128–129.

^ Croft 2003 , pp. 127–128; Willson 1963 , pp. 445–447.

^ John Chamberlain quoted in Croft 2003 , p. 129 and Willson 1963 , p. 447: "All was performed with great magnificence, but ... very confused and disorderly." ^ Croft 2003 , pp. 129–130; "Great Britains Salomon A sermon preached at the magnificent funerall, of the most high and mighty king, Iames, the late King of Great Britaine, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, &c. At the Collegiat Church of Saint Peter at Westminster, the seuenth of May 1625. By the Right Honorable, and Right Reuerend Father in God, Iohn, Lord Bishop of Lincolne, Lord Keeper of the Great Seale of England, &c" .

quod.lib.umich.edu . Retrieved 1 April 2021 .

^ Stanley, Arthur (1886), Historical Memorials of Westminster Abbey , London: John Murray, pp.

499– 526.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 130.

^ Stewart 2003 , p. 348: "A 1627 mission to save the Huguenots of La Rochelle ended in an ignominious siege on the Isle of Ré , leaving the Duke as the object of widespread ridicule." ^ Croft 2003 , p. 129.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 146.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 67.

^ Croft 2003 , pp. 3–4: "Often witty and perceptive but also prejudiced and abusive, their status as eye-witness accounts and their compulsive readability led too many historians to take them at face value"; Lockyer 1998 , pp. 1–4.

^ For more on the influence of Commonwealth historians on the tradition of tracing Charles I's errors back to his father's reign, see Lindley 1993 , p. 44.

^ Lockyer 1998 , p. 4.

^ Wormald 2011 .

^ Croft 2003 , pp. 1–9, 46.

^ Cramsie, John (June 2003), "The Changing Reputations of Elizabeth I and James VI & I" , Reviews and History: Covering books and digital resources across all fields of history (review no. 334) ^ Velde, Francois, Proclamation by the King, 24 March 1603 , heraldica.org , retrieved 9 February 2013 .

^ Velde, Francois, Proclamation by the King, 20 October 1604 , heraldica.org , retrieved 9 February 2013 .

^ Willson 1963 , pp. 252–253.

^ Pinches & Pinches 1974 , pp. 159–160.

^ a b c Pinches & Pinches 1974 , pp. 168–169.

^ a b Brooke-Little, J. P.

(1978) [1950], Boutell's Heraldry Revised edition, London: Frederick Warne, ISBN 0-7232-2096-4 , pp. 213, 215.

^ Stewart 2003 , pp. 140, 142.

^ Stewart 2003 , p. 248: "Latter day experts have suggested enteric fever, typhoid fever, or porphyria , but at the time poison was the most popular explanation ...

John Chamberlain wrote that it was 'verily thought that the disease was no other than the ordinary ague that had reigned and raged all over England'." ^ Barroll 2001 , p. 27; Willson 1963 , p. 452.

^ Croft 2003 , p. 55; Stewart 2003 , p. 142; Willson 1963 , p. 456.

^ Warnicke 2006 , p. xvi–xvii Sources [ edit ] Akrigg, G. P. V. (George Philip Vernon), ed. (1984), Letters of King James VI & I , Berkeley & Los Angeles: University of California, ISBN 978-0-5200-4707-5 Barroll, J. Leeds (2001), Anna of Denmark, Queen of England: A Cultural Biography , Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, ISBN 978-0-8122-3574-6 Bucholz, Robert; Key, Newton (2004), Early Modern England, 1485–1714: A Narrative History , Oxford: Blackwell, ISBN 978-0-6312-1393-2 Cogswell, Thomas (2005) [1989], The Blessed Revolution: English Politics and the Coming of War 1621–24 , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-5210-2313-9 Courtney, Alexander (2024), James VI, Britannic Prince: King of Scots and Elizabeth's Heir, 1566–1603 , London: Routledge, ISBN 978-1-138-60626-5 Croft, Pauline (2003), King James , Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, ISBN 978-0-3336-1395-5 .

Davies, Godfrey (1959) [1937], The Early Stuarts , Oxford: Clarendon Press, ISBN 978-0-1982-1704-6 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Donaldson, Gordon (1974), Mary, Queen of Scots , London: English Universities Press, ISBN 978-0-3401-2383-6 Fischlin, Daniel; Fortier, Mark (2002), " 'Enregistrate Speech': Stratagems of Monarchic Writing in the Work of James VI and I", in Fischlin, Daniel; Fortier, Mark (eds.), Royal Subjects: Essays on the Writings of James VI and I , Wayne State University Press, ISBN 978-0-8143-2877-4 Guy, John (2004), My Heart is My Own: The Life of Mary Queen of Scots , London and New York: Fourth Estate, ISBN 978-1-8411-5752-8 Hunter, James (2000), Last of the Free: A History of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland , Edinburgh: Mainstream, ISBN 978-1-8401-8376-4 Jack, R. D. S. (Ronald) (1988), "Poetry under King James VI", in Craig, Cairns (ed.), The History of Scottish Literature , vol. 1, Aberdeen University Press Keay, John; Keay, Julia (1994), Collins Encyclopaedia of Scotland , London: HarperCollins, ISBN 978-0-0025-5082-6 Krugler, John D. (2004), English and Catholic: The Lords Baltimore in the Seventeenth Century , Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, ISBN 978-0-8018-7963-0 Law, Thomas Graves (1904), "John Craig" , in Brown, P. Hume (ed.), Collected Essays and Reviews of Thomas Graves Law , Edinburgh: T. & A. Constable, Edinburgh University Press Lindley, David (1993), The Trials of Frances Howard: Fact and Fiction at the Court of King James , Routledge, ISBN 978-0-4150-5206-1 Lockyer, Roger (1981), Buckingham: The Life and Political Career of George Villiers, First Duke of Buckingham, 1592–1628 , Longman, ISBN 978-0-5825-0296-3 —— (1998), James VI and I , Longman, ISBN 978-0-5822-7961-2 MacKinnon, Kenneth (1991), Gaelic – A Past and Future Prospect , Edinburgh: The Saltire Society, ISBN 978-0-8541-1047-6 Martin, Patrick H. (2016), Elizabethan Espionage: Plotters and Spies in the Struggle Between Catholicism and the Crown , Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland, ISBN 978-1-4766-6255-8 Milling, Jane (2004), "The Development of a Professional Theatre", in Milling, Jane; Thomson, Peter; Donohue, Joseph W. (eds.), The Cambridge History of British Theatre , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-5216-5040-3 Pearce, Michael (2022), " 'Maskerye claythis' for James VI and Anna of Denmark", in Twycross, Meg (ed.), Medieval English Theatre 43 , Cambridge: D. S. Brewer, ISBN 978-1-84384-630-7 Perry, Curtis (2006), Literature and Favoritism in Early Modern England , Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-5218-5405-4 Pinches, John ; Pinches, Rosemary (1974), The Royal Heraldry of England , London: Heraldry Today, ISBN 0-9004-5525-X Rhodes, Neil; Richards, Jennifer; Marshall, Joseph (2003), King James VI and I: Selected Writings , Ashgate Publishing, ISBN 978-0-7546-0482-2 Rotary Club of Stornoway (1995), The Outer Hebrides Handbook and Guide , Machynlleth: Kittiwake, ISBN 978-0-9511-0035-6 Schama, Simon (2001), A History of Britain , vol. II, New York: Hyperion, ISBN 978-0-7868-6752-3 Smith, David L.

(2003), "Politics in Early Stuart Britain", in Coward, Barry (ed.), A Companion to Stuart Britain , Blackwell Publishing, ISBN 978-0-6312-1874-6 Stewart, Alan (2003), The Cradle King: A Life of James VI & I , London: Chatto and Windus, ISBN 978-0-7011-6984-8 Stroud, Angus (1999), Stuart England , Routledge, ISBN 978-0-4152-0652-5 Thompson, Francis (1968), Harris and Lewis, Outer Hebrides , Newton Abbot: David & Charles, ISBN 978-0-7153-4260-2 Thomson, Thomas , ed. (1827), Sir James Melvill of Halhill; Memoirs of his own life , Bannatyne Club Warnicke, Retha M.

(2006).

Mary Queen of Scots . New York: Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-4152-9182-8 .

Williams, Ethel Carleton (1970), Anne of Denmark , London: Longman, ISBN 978-0-5821-2783-8 Willson, David Harris (1963) [1956], King James VI & I , London: Jonathan Cape, ISBN 978-0-2246-0572-4 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Wormald, Jenny (May 2011) [2004], "James VI and I (1566–1625)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.), Oxford University Press, doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/14592 (Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) Further reading [ edit ] Akrigg, G. P. V. (1978).

Jacobean Pageant: The Court of King James I . New York: Atheneum.

ISBN 0-6897-0003-2 .

Fraser, Antonia (1974).

King James VI of Scotland, I of England . London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.

ISBN 0-2977-6775-5 .

Coward, Barry and Gaunt, Peter (2017).

The Stuart Age: England, 1603–1714 . 5th ed., ch. 4. Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-138-94954-6 Durston, Christopher (1993).

James I . Routledge.

ISBN 0-4150-7779-6 Fincham, Kenneth; Lake, Peter (1985). "The ecclesiastical policy of King James I".

Journal of British Studies , 24 (2): 169–207 Gardiner, S. R.

(1907). "Britain under James I" in The Cambridge Modern History , vol. 3, ch. 17 online Goodare, Julian (2009). "The debts of James VI of Scotland".

The Economic History Review 62 (4): 926–952 Hirst, Derek (1986).

Authority and Conflict: England 1603–1658 , pp. 96–136, Harvard University Press.

ISBN 0-6740-5290-0 Houston, S. J. (1974).

James I . Longman.

ISBN 0-5823-5208-8 Jackson, Clare (2025).

The Mirror of Great Britain: A Life of James VI and I . Allen Lane; Liveright.

Lee, Maurice (1984). "James I and the Historians: Not a Bad King After All?" Albion 16 (2): 151–163.

in JSTOR Montague, F. C. (1907).

The History of England from the Accession of James 1st to the Restoration (1603–1660) online Peck, Linda Levy (1982).

Northampton: Patronage and Policy at the Court of James I . HarperCollins.

ISBN 0-0494-2177-8 Questier, Michael .

"Every inch a king?: The posthumous reputation of James VI and I" (Review of books in this list by Gareth Russell, Anna Whitelock, and Clare Jackson.) TLS , August 8, 2025.

Russell, Gareth (2025).

Queen James: The Life and Loves of Britain's First King . William Collins. Also to be published as The Six Loves of James I . Atria Books.

Schwarz, Marc L. (1974). "James I and the Historians: Toward a Reconsideration" Journal of British Studies , 13 (2): 114–134 in JSTOR Smith, D. L. (1998).

A History of the Modern British Isles – 1603–1707 – The Double Crown chs. 2, 3.1, and 3.2. Blackwell.

ISBN 978-0-6311-9402-6 Whitelock, Anna (2025).

The Sun Rising: James I and the Dawn of Global Britain . Bloomsbury; Viking.

Wormald, Jenny (1983). "James VI and I: Two Kings or One?".

History .

68 (223): 187– 209.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-229X.1983.tb01404.x .

Young, Michael B. (1999).

King James VI and I and the History of Homosexuality . Springer.

—— (2012). "James VI and I: Time for a Reconsideration?".

Journal of British Studies .

51 (3): 540– 567.

doi : 10.1086/664955 .

S2CID 142991232 .

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original works by or about: James I of England and Ireland Wikimedia Commons has media related to James I of England .

Wikiquote has quotations related to James I of England .

James VI and I at the official website of the British monarchy James I at the official website of the Royal Collection Trust James I and VI at BBC History Portraits of King James I and VI at the National Portrait Gallery, London Works by James VI and I at Project Gutenberg Works by or about James VI and I at the Internet Archive Works by James VI and I at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Documents on James I curated by The National Archives James VI of Scotland & I of England House of Stuart Born: 19 June 1566 Died: 27 March 1625 Regnal titles Preceded by Mary King of Scotland 1567–1625 Succeeded by Charles I Preceded by Elizabeth I King of England and Ireland 1603–1625 Peerage of Scotland Vacant Title last held by James Duke of Rothesay 1566–1567 Vacant Title next held by Henry Frederick Preceded by Henry Stuart Duke of Albany 4th creation 1567 Merged with the Crown Links to related articles v t e Pictish and Scottish monarchs Monarchs of the Picts (traditional) Drest I Talorc I Nechtan I Drest II Galan Erilich Drest III Drest IV Gartnait I Cailtram Talorc II Drest V Galam Cennalath Bridei I Gartnait II Nechtan II Cinioch Gartnait III Bridei II Talorc III Talorgan I Gartnait IV Drest VI Bridei III Taran Bridei IV Nechtan III Drest VII Alpín I Óengus I Bridei V Ciniod I Alpín II Talorgan II Drest VIII Conall Constantine (I) Óengus II Drest IX Uuen Uurad Bridei VI Ciniod II Bridei VII Drest X Monarchs of the Scots (traditional) Kenneth I MacAlpin Donald I Constantine I (II) Áed Giric Eochaid (uncertain) Donald II Constantine II (III) Malcolm I Indulf Dub Cuilén Amlaíb Kenneth II Constantine III (IV) Kenneth III Malcolm II Duncan I Macbeth Lulach Malcolm III Canmore Donald III Duncan II Donald III Edgar Alexander I David I Malcolm IV William I the Lion Alexander II Alexander III Margaret First Interregnum John Second Interregnum Robert I David II Robert II Robert III James I James II James III James IV James V Mary James VI 1 Charles I 1 Charles II 1 James VII 1 Mary II 1 William II 1 Anne 1 1 also monarch of England and Ireland .

v t e English , Scottish and British monarchs Monarchs of England until 1603 Monarchs of Scotland until 1603 Alfred the Great Edward the Elder Ælfweard Æthelstan Edmund I Eadred Eadwig Edgar the Peaceful Edward the Martyr Æthelred the Unready Sweyn Edmund Ironside Cnut Harold Harefoot Harthacnut Edward the Confessor Harold Godwinson Edgar Ætheling William I William II Henry I Stephen Matilda Henry II Henry the Young King Richard I John Louis Henry III Edward I Edward II Edward III Richard II Henry IV Henry V Henry VI Edward IV Edward V Richard III Henry VII Henry VIII Edward VI Jane Mary I and Philip Elizabeth I Kenneth I MacAlpin Donald I Constantine I Áed Giric Eochaid Donald II Constantine II Malcolm I Indulf Dub Cuilén Amlaíb Kenneth II Constantine III Kenneth III Malcolm II Duncan I Macbeth Lulach Malcolm III Donald III Duncan II Edgar Alexander I David I Malcolm IV William I Alexander II Alexander III Margaret John Robert I David II Edward Balliol Robert II Robert III James I James II James III James IV James V Mary I James VI Monarchs of England and Scotland after the Union of the Crowns from 1603 James I & VI Charles I The Protectorate Oliver Cromwell Richard Cromwell Charles II James II & VII William III & II and Mary II Anne British monarchs after the Acts of Union 1707 Anne George I George II George III George IV William IV Victoria Edward VII George V Edward VIII George VI Elizabeth II Charles III Debated or disputed rulers are in italics.

v t e Dukes of Rothesay David (1398–1402) James (1402–1406) Alexander (1430) James (1430–1437) James (1452–1460) James (1473–1488) James (1507–1508) Arthur (1509–1510) James (1512–1513) James (1540–1541) James (1566–1567) Henry Frederick (1594–1612) Charles (1612–1625) Charles James (1629) Charles (1630–1649) James (1688–1689) George (1714–1727) Frederick (1727–1751) George (1762–1820) Albert Edward (1841–1901) George (1901–1910) Edward (1910–1936) Charles (1952–2022) William (2022–present) v t e Dukes of Albany Robert Stewart (1398–1420) Murdoch Stewart (1420–1425) Alexander Stewart (c. 1458–1485) John Stewart (1485–1536) Arthur or Robert Stewart (1541) Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley (1565–1567) James Stuart (1567) Charles Stuart (1603–1625) James Stuart (1660–1685) Ernest Augustus (1716–1728) Edward (1760–1767) Frederick (1784–1827) Prince Leopold (1881–1884) Prince Charles Edward (1884–1919) italics denote Dukes of York and Albany v t e House of Stewart Titles High Steward of Scotland Earl of Lennox Duke of Lennox Duke of Richmond Duke of Albany King of England King of Ireland Lord of Sticks Duke of Aubigny Earl of Moray Marquess of Bute Earl of March Earl of Galloway Branches Stewart of Appin Stewart of Ballechin Stewart of Castle Stewart Stewart of Balquhidder Stewart of Darnley Royal Stewarts The generations indicate descent from Robert II of Scotland , first monarch of the House of Stewart 1st generation Robert III of Scotland Walter, Earl of Fife Robert, Duke of Albany Alexander, Earl of Buchan Elizabeth, Lady Erroll Isabella, Countess of Douglas Jean, Lady Keith Katherine Logan Margaret, Lady of the Isles Marjorie, Countess of Moray David, Earl of Strathearn Walter, Earl of Atholl Elizabeth, Countess of Crawford Egidia, Lady Douglas 2nd generation David, Duke of Rothesay James I of Scotland Robert Margaret, Countess of Douglas Mary, Countess of Angus Elizabeth, Lady Dalkeith Egidia 3rd generation Margaret, Dauphine of France Isabella, Duchess of Brittany Eleanor, Archduchess of Austria Joan, Countess of Morton Alexander, Duke of Rothesay James II of Scotland Mary, Countess of Buchan Annabella, Countess of Geneva and Huntly 4th generation Mary, Countess of Arran James III of Scotland Alexander, Duke of Albany David, Earl of Moray John, Earl of Mar Margaret 5th generation James IV of Scotland James, Duke of Ross John, Earl of Mar 6th generation James, Duke of Rothesay Arthur, Duke of Rothesay James V of Scotland Alexander, Duke of Ross 7th generation James, Duke of Rothesay Robert, Duke of Albany Mary, Queen of Scots 8th generation James VI of Scotland and I of England 9th generation Henry Frederick, Prince of Wales Elizabeth, Queen of Bohemia Margaret Charles I of England Robert, Duke of Kintyre and Lorne Mary Sophia 10th generation Charles James, Duke of Cornwall and Rothesay Charles II Mary, Princess Royal and Princess of Orange James II Elizabeth Anne Katherine Henry, Duke of Gloucester Henrietta, Duchess of Orléans 11th generation Charles, Duke of Cambridge Mary II James, Duke of Cambridge Anne, Queen of Great Britain Charles, Duke of Kendal Edgar, Duke of Cambridge James Francis Edward, Prince of Wales Louisa Maria Theresa 12th generation Charles Edward "Bonnie Prince Charlie" Henry, Cardinal York Category v t e Mary, Queen of Scots Queen of Scotland (1542–1567), Queen consort of France (1559–1560) Family James V of Scotland (father) Mary of Guise (mother) James VI and I (son) Charles I (grandson) Elizabeth, Electress of the Palatinate (granddaughter) Margaret Tudor (grandmother) Edward VI (cousin) Mary I (cousin) Elizabeth I (cousin) Husbands Francis II of France Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley James Hepburn, 4th Earl of Bothwell Siblings James, Duke of Rothesay (brother) James Stewart, Commendator of Kelso and Melrose (half-brother) James Stewart, 1st Earl of Moray (half-brother) John Stewart, Commendator of Coldingham (half-brother) Robert Stewart, 1st Earl of Orkney (half-brother) Jean Campbell, Countess of Argyll (half-sister) Events Coronation Royal Entry First wedding Second wedding Murder of Lord Darnley Execution Funeral Battles and wars Rough Wooing Siege of Inverness Battle of Corrichie Battle of Carberry Hill Battle of Langside Marian civil war Plots and rebellions Chaseabout Raid Ridolfi plot Throckmorton Plot Babington Plot Rising of the North Treaties and Acts Secret Bond Ainslie Tavern Bond Accession and Coronation Act 1567 Treaty of Haddington Crown Matrimonial Cultural depictions Films The Execution of Mary Stuart (1895) The Loves of Mary, Queen of Scots (1923) The Heart of the Queen (1940) Mary of Scotland (film) (1936) Mary, Queen of Scots (1971 film) (1971) The Mirror Crack'd (1980) Elizabeth: The Golden Age (2007) Mary Queen of Scots (2013) Mary Queen of Scots (2018) Television Gunpowder, Treason & Plot (2004) Elizabeth I (2005 TV series) (2005) Queens: The Virgin and the Martyr (2017) Reign (TV series) (2017) Novels If It Had Happened Otherwise (1931) The Other Queen (2008) A Column of Fire (2017) Plays and operas Il Cromuele Episodes (ballet) Golden Eagle (play) Maria Stuarda Marie Stuart (opera) Mary Stewart (play) Mary Stuart (Schiller play) Mary, Queen of Scots (opera) Mary, Queen of Scots (play) Vivat! Vivat Regina!

Related David Rizzio (secretary) Guard Jewels Wardrobe Assured Scots Casket letters Book of Articles Oxburgh Hangings Ane New Yeir Gift to Quene Mary Association of Mary, Queen of Scots, and James VI Places of imprisonment Lochleven Castle Workington Hall Carlisle Castle Bolton Castle Tutbury Castle Sheffield Castle Sheffield Manor Lodge Wingfield Manor Chatsworth House Buxton Chartley Castle Tixall Gatehouse Fotheringhay Castle ← James V James VI → v t e Scots makars c. 1370 – c. 1460 John Barbour Huchoun James I Sir Gilbert Hay Andrew of Wyntoun Richard Holland c. 1460 – c. 1560 Blind Harry Robert Henryson Walter Kennedy William Dunbar Gavin Douglas David Lyndsay Richard Maitland John Stewart of Baldynneis William Stewart c. 1560 – 17th century Alexander Scott Alexander Montgomerie James VI Castalian Band William Fowler Christian Lindsay Elizabeth Melville Alexander Hume Robert Sempill Robert Sempill the younger Francis Sempill William Drummond John Stewart of Baldynneis 18th century – 20th century Allan Ramsay Robert Fergusson Robert Burns Robert Louis Stevenson Alicia Ann Spottiswoode William Soutar Robert Garioch Sydney Goodsir Smith Tom Scott George Campbell Hay Alexander Scott Hamish Henderson William Neill Makar or National Poet for Scotland (from 2004) Edwin Morgan Liz Lochhead Jackie Kay Kathleen Jamie Pàdraig MacAoidh v t e Anglicanism Communions Anglican Communion Anglican realignment Continuing Anglican movement Personal ordinariates Porvoo Communion History History of Christianity in Britain Celtic Christianity Anglo-Saxon Christianity Æthelberht Edwin Offa Augustine of Canterbury Paulinus Hygeberht Bede Medieval architecture Henry VIII English Reformation Cranmer Dissolution of Monasteries Church of England Church of Ireland Apostolic succession Edward VI Edwardian Reformation Elizabeth I Parker Hooker James I King James Version Charles I Laud Caroline Divines Nonjuring schism Oxford Movement Anglo-Catholicism Modern Church Theology Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Thirty-nine Articles The Books of Homilies Lambeth Quadrilateral Sacraments Eucharist Mary Saints Liturgy and worship Book of Common Prayer 1549 1552 1662 1928 1962 1979 Morning / Evening Prayer Liturgical year Biblical canon Books of Homilies High / Low / Broad church Related topics Converts to Anglicanism Heraldry Ministry Monasticism Music Anglican prayer beads Anglicanism of the Americas Free Church of England Reformed Episcopal Church Christianity portal v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e The Gunpowder Plot of 1605 Original plotters Guy Fawkes Robert Catesby John Wright Thomas Wintour Thomas Percy Recruits Robert Keyes Thomas Bates Christopher Wright John Grant Robert Wintour Ambrose Rokewood Everard Digby Francis Tresham See also Gunpowder Plot in popular culture Guy Fawkes Night Guy Fawkes mask Bonfire Night James I of England William Parker, 4th Baron Monteagle (informer) Henry Percy, 9th Earl of Northumberland Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium 2 3 Academics CiNii Artists ULAN RKD Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Te Papa (New Zealand) RISM NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐65tkh
Cached time: 20250817043808
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.199 seconds
Real time usage: 2.545 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 21444/1000000
Revision size: 105670/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 581957/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 143458/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 417458/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.255/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20741666/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2056.814      1 -total
 22.00%  452.447      2 Template:Reflist
 15.42%  317.251    119 Template:Sfn
 13.79%  283.553     45 Template:Citation
  8.82%  181.477      1 Template:Navboxes
  8.60%  176.917      2 Template:Infobox
  8.30%  170.716     18 Template:Cite_book
  8.26%  169.911      1 Template:Infobox_royalty
  6.61%  135.872     16 Template:Navbox
  4.99%  102.709    165 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:stable-pcache:269055:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043808 and revision id 1304850886. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=James_VI_and_I&oldid=1304850886 " Categories : James VI and I 1566 births 1625 deaths 16th-century Scottish male writers 16th-century Scottish monarchs 16th-century Scottish peers 16th-century Scottish poets 17th-century English monarchs 17th-century Irish monarchs 17th-century Scottish male writers 17th-century Scottish monarchs 17th-century Scottish writers Anglican philosophers British patrons of literature Burials at Westminster Abbey Castalian Band Child monarchs from Europe Demonologists Dukes of Albany Dukes of Rothesay English pretenders to the French throne Founders of colleges of the University of Oxford Historical figures with ambiguous or disputed sexuality House of Stuart Knights of the Garter People associated with the Gunpowder Plot People of the Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604) People of the Stuart period Princes and great stewards of Scotland Protestant monarchs Scottish non-fiction writers Scottish people of French descent Scottish scholars and academics Sons of queens regnant Hidden categories: Articles containing French-language text CS1: long volume value Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Featured articles Use British English from May 2020 Use dmy dates from July 2025 Articles containing Scottish Gaelic-language text Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing Latin-language text Pages using cite ODNB with id parameter Commons link from Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 15:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents James VI and I 85 languages Add topic

