Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Surviving writings and early accounts 2 Life Toggle Life subsection 2.1 Link to the Apostles and Jesus 2.2 Visit to Anicetus 2.3 Martyrdom 3 Importance 4 Veneration and commemoration 5 Theology 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Polycarp 54 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Christian bishop of Smyrna (69–155) For other uses, see Polycarp (disambiguation) .

Saint Polycarp of Smyrna Mosaic of Saint Polycarp inside the monastery of Hosios Loukas Church Father Bishop of Smyrna and Hieromartyr Born AD 69 Died AD 155 (aged 85–86) Smyrna , Roman Empire Venerated in Eastern Orthodox Church Catholic Church Oriental Orthodox Churches Church of the East Lutheranism Anglicanism Major shrine Sant'Ambrogio della Massima, Rome Feast 23 February (formerly 26 January) Attributes Wearing the pallium , holding a book representing his Epistle to the Philippians Patronage Earache sufferers [ citation needed ] Influences Clement of Rome , [ 1 ] John the Apostle Influenced Irenaeus Major works Epistle of Polycarp to the Philippians Polycarp ( / ˈ p ɒ l i k ɑːr p / ; Greek : Πολύκαρπος , Polýkarpos ; Latin : Polycarpus ; AD 69 – 155) was a Christian bishop of Smyrna .

[ 2 ] According to the Martyrdom of Polycarp , he died a martyr , bound and burned at the stake, then stabbed when the fire failed to consume his body.

[ 3 ] Polycarp is regarded as a saint and Church Father in the Eastern Orthodox Church , the Catholic Church , Oriental Orthodox Churches , Lutheranism , and Anglicanism .

Both Irenaeus [ 4 ] and Tertullian [ 5 ] say that Polycarp had been a disciple of John the Apostle , one of Jesus's disciples . In On Illustrious Men , Jerome similarly writes that Polycarp was a disciple of John the Apostle, who had ordained him as a bishop of Smyrna.

[ 6 ] Polycarp is regarded as one of three chief Apostolic Fathers , along with Clement of Rome and Ignatius of Antioch .

Surviving writings and early accounts [ edit ] The sole surviving work attributed to him is the Epistle of Polycarp to the Philippians , a mosaic of references to the Septuagint , which, along with an account of the Martyrdom of Polycarp , forms part of the collection of writings called Apostolic Fathers . After the Acts of the Apostles , which describes the death of Stephen , the Martyrdom is considered one of the earliest genuine accounts of a Christian martyrdom .

[ 2 ] Charles E. Hill argues extensively that the teachings Irenaeus ascribes to a certain apostolic presbyter throughout his writings represent lost teachings of Polycarp, his teacher.

[ 7 ] Within the lost epistle of Irenaeus to Florinus as cited by Eusebius within his Ecclesiastical History book 5.20. we observe Irenaeus make mention of multiple epistles authored by him to the neighbouring churches and to certain individuals.

Some scholars (e.g., Hans von Campenhausen ) [ 8 ] attribute the pastoral epistles —the biblical books 1 Timothy , 2 Timothy , and the Epistle to Titus —to Polycarp. Since the text of those books includes attribution to Paul , this theory regarding Polycarp's authorship places the books in the category of pseudepigrapha .

Life [ edit ] The chief sources of information concerning the life of Polycarp are The Martyrdom of Polycarp , Against Heresies , The Epistle to Florinus , the epistles of Ignatius , and Polycarp's own letter to the Philippians . In 1999, the Harris Fragments, a collection of 3rd- to 6th-century Coptic texts that mention Polycarp, were published.

[ 9 ] Link to the Apostles and Jesus [ edit ] According to Irenaeus, Polycarp was a companion of Papias , another "hearer of John", and a correspondent of Ignatius of Antioch which the document titled The Martyrdom of Ignatius confirms: And after a great deal of suffering he came to Smyrna, where he disembarked with great joy, and hastened to see the holy Polycarp, formerly his fellow disciple, and now bishop of Smyrna. For they had both, in old times, been disciples of St. John the Apostle.

— Martyrdom of Ignatius, Ch. 3 [ 10 ] Mosaic of Saint Polycarp from the Basilica of Sant'Apollinare Nuovo in Ravenna , Italy.

Ignatius addressed a letter to Polycarp and mentions him in his letters to the Ephesians and to the Magnesians .

[ 11 ] Polycarp's epistle to the Philippians gives us some insights to the early usage of early Christian texts from the quotes used within his letter.

[ 12 ] Irenaeus regarded the memory of Polycarp as a link to the apostolic past. In his letter to Florinus , a fellow student of Polycarp, Irenaeus relates how and when he became a Christian : [ 13 ] I could tell you the place where the blessed Polycarp sat to preach the Word of God. It is yet present to my mind with what gravity he everywhere came in and went out; what was the sanctity of his deportment, the majesty of his countenance; and what were his holy exhortations to the people. I seem to hear him now relate how he conversed with John and many others who had seen Jesus Christ, the words he had heard from their mouths.

[ 14 ] In particular, Irenaeus had heard the account of Polycarp's discussion with John and with others who had seen Jesus . Irenaeus reports that Polycarp was converted to Christianity by apostles, was consecrated a presbyter, and communicated with many who had seen Jesus. He writes that he had had the good fortune, when young, to know Polycarp, who was then far advanced in years.

[ 15 ] Visit to Anicetus [ edit ] According to Irenaeus, during the time his fellow Syrian Anicetus was Bishop of Rome , Polycarp visited Rome to discuss differences in the practices of the churches of Anatolia and Rome. Irenaeus states that on certain issues the two speedily came to an understanding, while as to the observance of Easter , each adhered to his own custom without breaking off full communion with the other.

[ 16 ] Polycarp followed the Eastern practice of celebrating the feast on the 14th of Nisan , the day of the Jewish Passover , regardless of the day of the week on which it fell, while Anicetus followed the Western practice of celebrating the feast on the first Sunday following the first full moon after the spring equinox . Anicetus allowed Polycarp to celebrate the Eucharist in his own church, which was regarded by the Romans as a great honor.

[ 16 ] Martyrdom [ edit ] Polycarp miraculously extinguishing the fire burning the city of Smyrna In the Martyrdom of Polycarp , Polycarp is reported to say on the day of his death: "Eighty and six years I have served Him, and He has done me no wrong." This could indicate either that he was then eighty-six years old [ 17 ] or that he had lived eighty-six years after his conversion.

[ 3 ] Polycarp goes on to say: "How then can I blaspheme my King and Savior? You threaten me with a fire that burns for a season, and after a little while is quenched; but you are ignorant of the fire of everlasting punishment that is prepared for the wicked." [ 14 ] Polycarp was burned at the stake and pierced with a spear for refusing to burn incense to the Roman emperor.

[ 18 ] On his farewell, he said: "I bless you, Father, for judging me worthy of this hour, so that in the company of the martyrs I may share the cup of Christ." [ 14 ] The date of Polycarp's death is in dispute.

Eusebius dates it to the reign of Marcus Aurelius , c. 166–167. However, a post-Eusebian addition to the Martyrdom of Polycarp dates his death to Saturday, 23 February, during the proconsulship of Lucius Statius Quadratus , c. 155 or 156. These earlier dates better fit the tradition of his association with Ignatius and John the Apostle.

The Martyrdom of Polycarp states that Polycarp was taken on the Sabbath and killed on "the Great Sabbath ". English patristic scholar William Cave wrote that this was evidence that the Smyrnaeans under Polycarp observed the seventh-day Sabbath (i.e. assembled on Saturdays).

[ 19 ] J. B. Lightfoot records as a common interpretation of the expression "the Great Sabbath" to refer to Passover or another Jewish festival.

[ 20 ] This is contradicted by the standard Jewish calendar , under which the 14th of Nisan (the date of Passover) can fall no earlier than late March and hence at least a month after the traditional date of Polycarp's death 23 February. Hence, Lightfoot understood the expression in reference to the Purim festival, celebrated a month before Passover.

[ 21 ] Other scholars suggest that at the time the Jewish calendar had not yet been standardized, and that this day, Jews and Christians celebrated Passover and a Christian Passover , respectively.

[ 22 ] Athonite Fresco of the Martyrdom of Saint Polykarpos.

Importance [ edit ] Engraving by Michael Burghers, c. 1685 Polycarp occupies an important place in the history of the early Christian Church, [ 9 ] was called "the most admirable Polycarp one of these [elect], in whose times among us he showed himself an apostolic and prophetic teacher and bishop of the Catholic Church in Smyrna" [ 23 ] by his contemporaries. He is among the earliest Christians whose writings survived. Jerome wrote that Polycarp was a "disciple of the apostle John and by him ordained presbyter of Smyrna".

[ 24 ] He was an elder of an important congregation that was a large contributor to the founding of the Christian Church. He is from an era whose orthodoxy is accepted alongside Catholics by the ancient Eastern Orthodox Churches and Oriental Orthodox Churches, and widely also by mainstream Protestants, Church of God groups, and Sabbatarians .

According to Eusebius, Polycrates of Ephesus cited the example of Polycarp in defense of local practices during the quartodeciman controversy .

[ 25 ] Irenaeus, who as a young man had heard Polycarp preach, described him as [ 26 ] "a man who was of much greater weight, and a more steadfast witness of truth, than Valentinus , and Marcion , and the rest of the heretics ." Polycarp lived in an age after the deaths of the apostles, when a variety of interpretations of the sayings of Jesus were being preached. His role was to authenticate orthodox teachings through his connection with the apostle John: "a high value was attached to the witness Polycarp could give as to the genuine tradition of old apostolic doctrine", [ 3 ] "his testimony condemning as offensive novelties the figments of the heretical teachers". Irenaeus states (iii. 3) that on Polycarp's visit to Rome, his testimony converted many disciples of Marcion and Valentinus.

Veneration and commemoration [ edit ] The Martyrdom of Polycarp is one of the earliest, if not the earliest, accounts of the veneration of the relics of a saint and the annual commemoration of a saint on the date of his or her death: And so we afterwards took up his bones which are more valuable than precious stones and finer than refined gold, and laid them in a suitable place; where the Lord will permit us to gather ourselves together, as we are able, in gladness and joy, and to celebrate the birth-day of his martyrdom for the commemoration of those that have already fought in the contest, and for the training and preparation of those that shall do so hereafter.

[ 27 ] Relics of Polycarp are under the main altar of the church of Sant'Ambrogio della Massima .

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] The right arm of St. Polycarp had been kept at the Monastery of the Dormition of the Theotokos-Saint Polycarp, in Ampelakiotissa near Nafpaktos, Greece, for over 500 years. It was stolen on 14 March 2013 and never recovered; however, a fragment, taken from the arm on a previous occasion, was discovered and returned to the monastery on 14 July 2019.

[ 30 ] In the Roman Catholic , Eastern Orthodox and Greek Catholic Churches, the feast day of Saint Polycarp is 23 February. In the Roman Catholic liturgical calendar , the feast day has the liturgical rank of obligatory memorial, but if the memorial is within the season of Lent that year, it is reduced in rank to a commemoration. In the Coptic Orthodox Church, his feast day is on 29 Amshir (8 March in the Gregorian calendar ). Polycarp is remembered in the Church of England with a Lesser Festival on 23 February.

[ 31 ] He is also honored in the Lutheran Churches on 23 February.

[ 32 ] Theology [ edit ] Saint Polycarp Polycarp's soteriology is not clear; he does cite Ephesians 2:8 to say salvation is by grace rather than works, though later exhorts his readers to do good works. It is not clear from the text how he views works in relation to salvation as his comments are too little to make a clear conclusion. He could have believed that works are mere results of saving grace or that they are necessary to keep salvation and that they have meritorious value, thus we cannot know if he was a monergist or a synergist .

[ 33 ] Polycarp in his letter calls Jesus the "son of God" and the "eternal high priest" and that "to him all heavenly and earthly things were subjected, whom every breath worships, who comes as a judge of the living and the dead". He also highlighted the sinlessness of Jesus, [ 34 ] defended the doctrine of the Incarnation and the death of Christ on the cross, and clearly opposed docetism .

[ 34 ] Polycarp outright denied the teachings of Marcion , claiming he was the firstborn of Satan .

[ 35 ] Polycarp's statements in the Martyrdom of Polycarp also appear to have trinitarian theology.

[ 36 ] What we know of Polycarp's eschatology is largely confined to the affirmation of the resurrection of the dead and Christ's second coming as a judge.

[ 34 ] Polycarp was perhaps a premillennialist ; Polycarp's student Irenaeus was a premillennialist along with his associate Papias, which suggests that Polycarp also held similar views.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Polycarp refers to multiple books of the New Testament as scripture, including: Matthew , Acts , 1 John , Philippians , Jude , 1 Peter , 1 Timothy , 2 Timothy , Romans and others.

[ 39 ] Polycarp also quotes the deuterocanonical book of Tobit ; however, from his manner of quotation it is not possible to know how much authority he afforded it.

[ 40 ] Polycarp's letter to the Philippians only mentions presbyters and deacons, which indicates the church at Philippi was led by a plurality of "elder-bishops", which would imply a different ecclesiastical polity than what is found in Ignatius of Antioch 's letters. Against this, according to Steinhauser, the letter does not offer concrete evidence that the Philippian church viewed presbyters and bishops as synonyms, though still admitting that the letter still raises questions about the polity of the early church . Steinhauser hypothesized that there was possibly a temporary vacancy in the Philippian church.

[ 41 ] Polycarp was a Quartodeciman . According to Eusebius, Polycarp claimed that he celebrated Easter on the 14th of Nisan with John the Apostle .

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] Polycarp appears to make heresy a more serious issue than immorality. Polycarp calls immoral people to repent but called the false teachers "firstborn of Satan." [ 44 ] Polycarp stated, "I have served him [Christ] eighty-six years and in no way has he dealt unjustly with me." Proponents of infant baptism have argued that this quote shows Polycarp being baptized as an infant , the argument being that if Polycarp was a servant of Christ for 86 years, he would have been a servant of Christ from infancy, suggesting infant baptism. However, Credobaptists such as Schoedel William have offered a different interpretation of the words of Polycarp, stating that the quote is ambiguous as regards to baptism, and that Polycarp can be understood as meaning by paraphrasing: "I have always served Jesus and I am not going to cease even at the age of 86." [ 45 ] See also [ edit ] Saints portal Biography portal Christianity portal History portal Christianity in the 1st century Christianity in the ante-Nicene period Early Christianity List of Christian martyrs Saint Polycarp, patron saint archive References [ edit ] ^ Richardson, Cyril C. (1953). Early Christian Fathers. Pag 125–137.

^ a b Polycarp at the Encyclopædia Britannica ^ a b c Henry Wace, Dictionary of Christian Biography and Literature to the End of the Sixth Century A.D., with an Account of the Principal Sects and Heresies , s.v.

"Polycarpus, bishop of Smyrna".

^ Irenaeus, Adversus Haereses III.3 ^ Tertullian, De praescriptione hereticorum 32.2 ^ "Kirby, Peter. "St. Polycarp of Smyrna." Early Christian Writings. 2020. 10 January 2020" .

^ Hill, Charles E. (2006).

From the Lost Teaching of Polycarp: Identifying Irenaeus' Apostolic Presbyter and the Author of Ad Diognetum . Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck. pp. v, 2– 3, 7, 8ff (8–94).

ISBN 3-16-148699-4 .

OCLC 64571945 .

^ Grant, Robert M.

(1963). "Chapter 14: The Non-Pauline Epistles".

A Historical Introduction to the New Testament . Harper and Row.

^ a b Hartog, Paul (2002).

Polycarp and the New Testament . Mohr Siebeck. p. 17.

ISBN 978-3-16-147419-4 .

^ Martyrdom of Ignatius, Ch. 3 ^ Irenaeus, V.xxxiii .

^ That Ancient Faith, How Polycarp (And Others) Show The Early Use Of The New Testament ^ Bacchus, Francis Joseph (1911).

"St. Polycarp" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 12. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ a b c Fr. Paolo O. Pirlo, SHMI (1997). "St. Polycarp".

My First Book of Saints . Sons of Holy Mary Immaculate – Quality Catholic Publications. pp.

58– 59.

ISBN 971-91595-4-5 .

^ Liguori, Alphonsus. "St. Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna", Victories of the Martyrs , (Eugene Grimm, ed.), New York, Benziger Brothers, 1888, p. 66 This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ a b Andrews, Herbert Tom (1911).

"Polycarp" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 22 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

20– 22.

^ Staniforth, Maxwell, trans.

Early Christian Writings London: Penguin Books (1987): 115.

^ "Polycarp – Martyrdom" . Polycarp.net.

^ William Cave, Primitive Christianity: or the Religion of the Ancient Christians in the First Ages of the Gospel . 1840, revised edition by H. Cary. Oxford, London, p. 84–85).

^ J. B. Lightfoot, Apostolic Fathers. Part II. S. Ignatius. S. Polycarp.

Vol. 1, p. 610-611.

^ J. B. Lightfoot, Apostolic Fathers. Part II. S. Ignatius. S. Polycarp.

Vol. 1, p. 713.

^ August Strobel, Ursprung und Geschichte der frühchristlichen Osterkalenders, Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 1977, pp. 247–248 ^ MartPol 16:2 and Smyr 8:2 ^ Schaff, Philip (ed.), Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers , 2, vol. 3 ^ "Eusebius, Church History, Book V, Chapter 24" .

^ Irenaeus, Adversus Haereses III.3.4 ^ "Medieval Sourcebook: The Martyrdom of Polycarp trans. J.B. Lightfoot" .

Fordham University . Retrieved 23 February 2024 .

^ "Polycarp, bishop and martyr – February 23rd" .

Saint In Rome & Beyond . Retrieved 23 February 2024 .

^ Schaubler, Vera; Schindler, Hanns Michael (1998).

Heilige und Namenspatrone im Jahreslauf . Augsburg: Pattloch Verlag. p. 77.

ISBN 3629008305 .

^ Sanidopoulos, John.

"A Relic of Saint Polycarp Returns to Nafpaktos (Update on the 2013 Theft)" .

Orthodox Christianity Then And Now . Retrieved 23 February 2024 .

^ "The Calendar" .

The Church of England . Retrieved 27 March 2021 .

^ Lutheran Service Book . Concordia Publishing House. 2006. pp. xiii.

ISBN 978-0-7586-1217-5 .

^ Cooper, Jordan (27 June 2013).

The Righteousness of One: An Evaluation of Early Patristic Soteriology in Light of the New Perspective on Paul . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-62189-771-2 .

^ a b c Smirne), Policarpo (santo, vescovo di (25 July 2013).

Polycarp's Epistle to the Philippians and the Martyrdom of Polycarp: Introduction, Text, and Commentary . University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-922839-3 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Hill, Charles E.; Hill, Charles Evan (2006).

From the Lost Teaching of Polycarp: Identifying Irenaeus' Apostolic Presbyter and the Author of Ad Diognetum . Mohr Siebeck.

ISBN 978-3-16-148699-9 .

^ P, Gilles Emery, O.; Levering, Matthew (27 October 2011).

The Oxford Handbook of the Trinity . OUP Oxford.

ISBN 978-0-19-955781-3 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "A Brief History of Early Premillennialism" .

Scholars Crossing .

^ Chung, Sung Wook; Mathewson, David L. (27 August 2018).

Models of Premillennialism . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-5326-3769-8 .

^ Wilson, Luke J. (21 November 2021).

"How Polycarp (And Others) Show The Early Use Of The New Testament" .

That Ancient Faith . Retrieved 8 May 2022 .

^ Berding, Kenneth (22 December 2015).

Polycarp and Paul: An Analysis of Their Literary and Theological Relationship in Light of Polycarp's Use of Biblical and Extra-Biblical Literature . BRILL.

ISBN 978-90-04-31327-9 .

^ Smirne), Policarpo (santo, vescovo di (25 July 2013).

Polycarp's Epistle to the Philippians and the Martyrdom of Polycarp: Introduction, Text, and Commentary . University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-922839-3 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Easter Controversy" .

www.newadvent.org . Retrieved 6 May 2022 .

^ "The Passover-Easter-Quartodeciman Controversy" .

Grace Communion International . Retrieved 6 May 2022 .

^ Reeves, Michael; Maiden, Peter (20 March 2015).

Introducing Major Theologians: From The Apostolic Fathers To The Twentieth Century . Inter-Varsity Press.

ISBN 978-1-78359-367-5 .

^ Schoedel, William R. (3 June 2020).

The Apostolic Fathers, A New Translation and Commentary, Volume V: Polycarp, Martyrdom of Polycarp, Fragments of Papias . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-7252-8086-1 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Polycarp .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: Polycarp of Smyrna Wikimedia Commons has media related to Polycarp of Smyrna .

Early Christian Writings Polycarp, text and introductions Polycarp: The Apostolic Legacy Paul N. Tobin, "The Apostolic Succession: Polycarp and Clement" A skeptical assessment of inconsistencies in the tradition The Martyrdom of Polycarp: The Contemporary Account of His Death in the Letter to the Smyrnaeans.

The Golden Legend: Polycarp of Smyrna Works by or about Polycarp at the Internet Archive Works by Polycarp at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Links to related articles v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate Crusading movement History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles in the New Testament Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380–451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Clash against the empire Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Protestant Reformation Catholic Counter-Reformation Exsurge Domine Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine European wars of religion Thirty Years' War Baroque period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX United States Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazi Germany Mit brennender Sorge Pope John XXIII Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Ecumenism Judaism Pope Paul VI ( coronation ) Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa USSR Pope John Paul II HIV/AIDS World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 2023 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis Laudato si' Patriarch Kirill COVID-19 pandemic Pope Leo XIV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal v t e History of Christianity Spread History of theology Historicity of the Bible List of martyrs Timeline Centuries 1st 2nd and 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st Early Christianity Origins and Apostolic Age Background Chronology of Jesus birth baptism ministry crucifixion resurrection Great Commission ascension historical Jesus Holy Spirit Apostles in the New Testament Jewish Christianity Split Paul the Apostle Council of Jerusalem Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period Diversity Adoptionism Arianism Docetism Donatism Gnosticism Marcionism Montanism Canon development Persecution Apostolic / Church Fathers Clement of Rome Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Tertullian Origen Great Church Early African Late antiquity Constantine Constantinian shift Roman state religion Monasticism Councils Nicaea I Creed Christianity Athanasius Jerome Augustine Constantinople I Ephesus I Chalcedon Chalcedonian / Non-Chalcedonian Biblical canon Catholicism ( Timeline ) Papacy Development of primacy Eastern Orthodox opposition Peace and Truce of God Crusading movement Lateran IV Art patronage of Julius II Leo X Counter-Reformation Trent Art Catholic Reformation Jesuits Xavier Thomas More Monastery dissolution Wars Mass rocks and priest holes Guadalupe Jansenists Molinists Neo-Scholasticism Teresa Modernism Independent Catholics Vatican I and Vatican II Ecclesial community Eastern Christianity Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Church of the East Chrysostom Nestorianism Icons Iconodulism Iconoclasm Great Schism Fall of Constantinople Armenia Georgia Greece Egypt Syriac Ethiopia Ottoman Empire Bulgaria Russia Serbia North America Middle Ages Pelagianism Gregory I Celtic Germanic Anglo-Saxon Franks Gothic Scandinavian Iceland Slavs Bohemia Bulgaria Kievan Rus' Moravia Poland Pomerania Investiture Anselm Abelard Bernard Bogomils Bosnian Cathars Apostolic Brethren Dulcinian Crusades Waldensians Inquisition Early Scholasticism Christian mysticism Dominic Francis Bonaventure Aquinas Five Ways Wycliffe Avignon Papal Schism Bohemian Reformation Hus Conciliarism Synods Reformation and Protestantism Erasmus Eucharist Calvinist–Arminian debate Arminianism Wars Resistance theories Separation of church and state Nicodemites Hymnody of continental Europe Formal and material principles Law and Gospel Literature Protestant work ethic Lutheranism Luther Ninety-five Theses Diet of Worms Theology Bible Melanchthon Book of Concord Orthodoxy Eucharist Art Calvinism Zwingli Calvin Huguenots Presbyterianism Scotland Knox TULIP Baptism Dort Three Forms of Unity Westminster Orthodoxy Metrical psalters Anglicanism ( Timeline ) Henry VIII Cranmer Elizabethan 39 Articles Puritans Civil War Church music Book of Common Prayer King James Version Anabaptism Theology Radical Reformation Grebel Swiss Brethren Müntzer Martyrs' Synod Menno Simons Smyth Martyrs Mirror Ausbund 1640–1789 Revivalism Missionaries timeline Baptists Separation of church and state Edicts of toleration Congregationalism First Great Awakening Methodism Millerism Pietism Fostering of early experimental science Neo- and Old Lutherans 1789–present Camp meeting Holiness movement Second Great Awakening Restorationists Jehovah's Witnesses Mormonism Seventh-day Adventist Adventism Oxford Movement Laestadianism Finnish Awakening Christian existentialism Third Great Awakening Azusa Revival Gospel music Fundamentalist – Modernist controversy Pacifism Ecumenism Five solae Jesus movement Pentecostalism Charismatics Liberation theology Reformed epistemology Fourth Great Awakening Evangelical and Mainline Protestants Christian right and left Political influence of Evangelicalism in Latin America v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐mkwhz
Cached time: 20250817044042
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.876 seconds
Real time usage: 1.100 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4829/1000000
Revision size: 29127/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 346207/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 114095/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 158160/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.496/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23759324/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  825.776      1 -total
 28.44%  234.822      1 Template:Reflist
 14.18%  117.116      1 Template:Navboxes
 11.99%   99.040     10 Template:Cite_web
 11.79%   97.343      3 Template:Sister_project
 11.60%   95.822      3 Template:Side_box
 10.09%   83.328      2 Template:Langx
  9.96%   82.217      2 Template:Navbox
  9.26%   76.431      1 Template:History_of_Catholic_theology
  8.90%   73.460     15 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:24955:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044042 and revision id 1302401236. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Polycarp&oldid=1302401236 " Categories : 69 births 155 deaths 1st-century Romans 2nd-century bishops in Roman Anatolia 2nd-century Christian martyrs 2nd-century executions 2nd-century writers Ancient Smyrnaeans Anglican saints Christian anti-Gnosticism Church Fathers Doctors of the Church Eastern Orthodox bishops of Smyrna People executed by the Roman Empire Roman Catholic bishops in the Holy Roman Empire Roman Catholic writers Saints from Roman Anatolia Hidden categories: Articles with Encyclopædia Britannica links Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Source attribution Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 05:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Polycarp 54 languages Add topic

