Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions 2 Age 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Alluvium 61 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latgaļu Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Loose soil or sediment that is eroded and redeposited in a non-marine setting "Alluvial" redirects here; not to be confused with Alluvial (horse) or Alluvial diagram .

Alluvium and adjacent constituents Alluvium deposits in the Gamtoos Valley in South Africa An alluvial plain in Red Rock Canyon State Park (California) Alluvial river deposits in the Amazon basin , near Autazes, AM, Brazil . The seasonal deposits are extremely fertile and crucial to subsistence farming in the Amazon Basin along the river banks.

Alluvium (from Latin alluvius , from alluere ' to wash against ' ) is loose clay , silt , sand , or gravel that has been deposited by running water in a stream bed, on a floodplain , in an alluvial fan or beach , or in similar settings.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Alluvium is also sometimes called alluvial deposit .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Alluvium is typically geologically young and is not consolidated into solid rock.

Sediments deposited underwater, in seas, estuaries , lakes, or ponds, are not described as alluvium.

[ 1 ] Floodplain alluvium can be highly fertile, and supported some of the earliest human civilizations.

[ 6 ] Definitions [ edit ] The present consensus is that "alluvium" refers to loose sediments of all types deposited by running water in floodplains or in alluvial fans or related landforms .

[ 1 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] However, the meaning of the term has varied considerably since it was first defined in the French dictionary of Antoine Furetière , posthumously published in 1690. Drawing upon concepts from Roman law , Furetière defined alluvion (the French term for alluvium) as new land formed by deposition of sediments along rivers and seas.

[ 8 ] By the 19th century, the term had come to mean recent sediments deposited by rivers on top of older diluvium , which was similar in character but interpreted as sediments deposited by Noah's flood . With the rejection by geologists of the concept of a primordial universal flood, the term "diluvium" fell into disfavor and was replaced with "older alluvium". At the same time, the term "alluvium" came to mean all sediment deposits due to running water on plains. The definition gradually expanded to include deposits in estuaries, coasts, and young rock of marine and fluvial origin.

[ 8 ] Alluvium and diluvium were grouped as colluvium in the late 19th century. "Colluvium" is now generally understood as sediments produced by gravity -driven transport on steep slopes. At the same time, the definition of "alluvium" has switched back to an emphasis on sediments deposited by river action. There continues to be disagreement over what other sediment deposits should be included under the term "alluvium".

[ 8 ] Age [ edit ] Most alluvium is Quaternary in age and is often referred to as "cover" because these sediments obscure the underlying bedrock . Most sedimentary material that fills a basin ("basin fill") that is not lithified is typically lumped together as "alluvial".

[ 9 ] Alluvium of Pliocene age occurs, for example, in parts of Idaho .

[ 10 ] Alluvium of late Miocene age occurs, for example, in the valley of the San Joaquin River , California .

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Alluvial plain Bay mud Braided stream Desert pavement Eluvium Hydraulic action Illuvium References [ edit ] ^ a b c Jackson, Julia A., ed. (1997). "alluvium".

Glossary of geology (Fourth ed.). Alexandria, Virginia: American Geological Institute.

ISBN 0922152349 .

^ Glossary of Geological Terms . Geotech.org. Retrieved on 2012-02-12.

^ Geology Dictionary – Alluvial, Aquiclude, Arkose . Geology.Com. Retrieved on 2012-02-12.

^ Jackson, Julia A., ed. (1997). "alluvial deposit".

Glossary of geology (Fourth ed.). Alexandria, Virginia: American Geological Institute.

ISBN 0922152349 .

^ Allaby, Michael (2013). "alluvium".

A dictionary of geology and earth sciences (Fourth ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199653065 .

^ Kidder, Tristram; Liu, Haiwang; Xu, Qinghai; Li, Minglin (July 2012). "The Alluvial Geoarchaeology of the Sanyangzhuang Site on the Yellow River Floodplain, Henan Province, China: THE YELLOW RIVER FLOODPLAIN, HENAN PROVINCE".

Geoarchaeology .

27 (4): 324– 343.

doi : 10.1002/gea.21411 .

S2CID 140587757 .

^ Allaby 2013 , "alluvial".

^ a b c d Miller, Bradley A.; Juilleret, Jérôme (October 2020).

"The colluvium and alluvium problem: Historical review and current state of definitions" .

Earth-Science Reviews .

209 103316.

Bibcode : 2020ESRv..20903316M .

doi : 10.1016/j.earscirev.2020.103316 .

^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Alluvium" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

^ Ames, Dan (1998), "Formation of the Soils" (PDF) , Soil Survey of Jerome County and Part of Twin Falls County, Idaho , Natural Resources Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture , p. 238 ^ Huber, N. King (1981).

Amount and Timing of Late Cenozoic Uplift and Tilt of the Central Sierra Nevada, California—Evidence from the Upper San Joaquin River Basin (USGS Professional Paper 1197) (PDF) . Washington D.C.: USGS . p. 13.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Alluvium at Wikimedia Commons Authority control databases Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alluvium&oldid=1303532055 " Category : Sedimentology Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 14:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alluvium 61 languages Add topic

