Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work Toggle Life and work subsection 1.1 Astronomical work 1.2 Mathematical work 2 Namesake 3 Citations and footnotes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Conon of Samos 30 languages Alemannisch العربية Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greek astronomer and mathematician (c.280–c.220 BC) Conon of Samos ( Greek : Κόνων ὁ Σάμιος , Konōn ho Samios ; c. 280 – c. 220 BC) was a Greek astronomer and mathematician . He is primarily remembered for naming the constellation Coma Berenices .

Life and work [ edit ] Conon was born on Samos , Ionia , and possibly died in Alexandria , Ptolemaic Egypt , where he was court astronomer to Ptolemy III Euergetes . He named the constellation Coma Berenices ("Berenice's Hair") after Ptolemy's  wife Berenice II . She sacrificed her hair in exchange for her husband's safe return from the Third Syrian War , which began in 246 BC. When the lock of hair disappeared, Conon explained that the goddess had shown her favor by placing it in the sky. Not all Greek astronomers accepted the designation. In Ptolemy 's Almagest , Coma Berenices is not listed as a distinct constellation. However, Ptolemy does attribute several seasonal indications ( parapegma ) to Conon. Conon was a friend of the mathematician Archimedes whom he probably met in Alexandria.

Astronomical work [ edit ] In astronomy, Conon wrote in seven books his De astrologia , including observations on solar eclipses. Ptolemy further attributes seventeen "signs of the seasons" to Conon, although this may not have been given in De astrologia . Seneca writes that "Conon was a careful observer" and that he "recorded solar eclipses observed by the Egyptians", [ 1 ] although the accuracy of this statement is doubted. The Roman Catullus writes that Conon "discerned all the lights of the vast universe, and disclosed the risings and settings of the stars, how the fiery brightness of the sun is darkened, and how the stars retreat at fixed times." [ 2 ] Mathematical work [ edit ] Pappus states that the spiral of Archimedes was discovered by Conon.

Apollonius of Perga reported that Conon worked on conic sections , and his work became the basis for Apollonius' fourth book of the Conics . Apollonius further reports that Conon sent some of his work to Thrasydaeus , but that it was incorrect. Since this work has not survived it is impossible to assess the accuracy of Apollonius' comment.

Namesake [ edit ] Conon (crater) , named in his honor Citations and footnotes [ edit ] ^ Otto E. Neugebauer (1975) ^ Ivor Bulmer-Thomas (1970-1990) References [ edit ] Ivor Bulmer-Thomas . "Conon of Samos." Dictionary of Scientific Biography 3:391.

Otto E. Neugebauer , A History of Ancient Mathematical Astronomy (New York, 1975).

External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Conon of Samos" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers Aglaonice Agrippa Anaximander Andronicus Apollonius Aratus Aristarchus Aristyllus Attalus Autolycus Bion Callippus Cleomedes Cleostratus Conon Eratosthenes Euctemon Eudoxus Geminus Heraclides Hicetas Hipparchus Hippocrates of Chios Hypsicles Menelaus Meton Oenopides Philip of Opus Philolaus Posidonius Ptolemy Pytheas Seleucus Sosigenes of Alexandria Sosigenes the Peripatetic Strabo Thales Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Timocharis Works Almagest (Ptolemy) Catasterismi (Eratosthenes) Little Astronomy On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On the Heavens (Aristotle) Instruments Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrolabe Dioptra Equatorial ring Gnomon Mural instrument Triquetrum Concepts Callippic cycle Celestial spheres Circle of latitude Counter-Earth Deferent and epicycle Equant Geocentrism Heliocentrism Hipparchic cycle Inferior and superior planets Metonic cycle Octaeteris Solstice Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Zodiac Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Influenced Medieval European science Indian astronomy Medieval Islamic astronomy v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Authority control databases International VIAF Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conon_of_Samos&oldid=1286640438 " Categories : 3rd-century BC Greek writers Ancient Samians Ancient Greek astronomers Ancient Greek geometers 280s BC births 220s BC deaths 3rd-century BC Greek mathematicians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text This page was last edited on 21 April 2025, at 03:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Conon of Samos 30 languages Add topic

