Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Naming conventions 2 Contents Toggle Contents subsection 2.1 5 Ezra 2.2 4 Ezra 2.3 6 Ezra 3 Author and criticism 4 Usage 5 See also Toggle See also subsection 5.1 Footnotes 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Sources 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents 2 Esdras 34 languages አማርኛ العربية Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Magyar Македонски Malagasy Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Українська اردو Walon 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Apocalyptic appendix to Vulgate (70-218 CE) This article is about an apocryphal work attributed to Ezra. For the protocanonical book following the canonical Book of Ezra, see Book of Nehemiah . For other biblical books called "Esdras", see Esdras .

Illustration of the triple-headed eagle from Ezra's vision (head-piece from Bowyer Bible , Apocrypha , 1815) Tanakh ( Judaism ) Torah (Instruction) Genesis Bereshit Exodus Shemot Leviticus Wayiqra Numbers Bemidbar Deuteronomy Devarim Nevi'im (Prophets) Former Joshua Yehoshua Judges Shofetim Samuel Shemuel Kings Melakhim Latter Isaiah Yeshayahu Jeremiah Yirmeyahu Ezekiel Yekhezqel Minor Hosea Joel Amos Obadiah Jonah Micah Nahum Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi Ketuvim (Writings) Poetic Psalms Tehillim Proverbs Mishlei Job Iyov Five Megillot (Scrolls) Song of Songs Shir Hashirim Ruth Rut Lamentations Eikhah Ecclesiastes Qohelet Esther Ester Historical Daniel Daniyyel Ezra–Nehemiah Ezra Chronicles Divre Hayyamim Old Testament ( Christianity ) Pentateuch Genesis Exodus Leviticus Numbers Deuteronomy Historical Joshua Judges Ruth 1–2 Samuel 1–2 Kings 1–2 Chronicles Ezra Nehemiah Esther Poetic Job Psalms Proverbs Ecclesiastes Song of Songs Prophetic Major prophets Isaiah Jeremiah Lamentations Ezekiel Daniel Minor prophets Hosea Joel Amos Obadiah Jonah Micah Nahum Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi Deuterocanonical Tobit Judith Additions to Esther 1 Maccabees 2 Maccabees Wisdom of Solomon Sirach Baruch / Letter of Jeremiah Additions to Daniel Orthodox only 1 Esdras 2 Esdras Prayer of Manasseh Psalm 151 3 Maccabees 4 Maccabees Orthodox Tewahedo Enoch Jubilees 1, 2, and 3 Meqabyan Paralipomena of Baruch Broader canon Bible portal v t e Christian eschatology Contrasting beliefs Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Futurism Dispensationalism Preterism Idealism The Millennium Amillennialism Postmillennialism Premillennialism Prewrath rapture Posttribulation rapture Dispensationalism Biblical texts Daniel Seventy Weeks Synoptic Gospels Olivet Discourse Mark 13 Matthew 24 Sheep and Goats Pauline Epistles 2 Thessalonians Johannine literature Revelation (Events) Pseudepigrapha 1 Enoch 2 Esdras Key terms Abomination of desolation Antichrist Apocalypse Apocatastasis Armageddon The Beast False prophet Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Gog and Magog Great Apostasy Great Tribulation Katechon Kingdom of God Lake of fire Last Judgment Man of sin New Earth New Jerusalem Number of the Beast Rapture Resurrection of the dead Second Coming Seven bowls Seven seals Son of perdition Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Woman of the Apocalypse World to come Christianity portal v t e 2 Esdras , also called 4 Esdras , Latin Esdras , or Latin Ezra , is an apocalyptic book in some English versions of the Bible .

[ a ] [ b ] [ 2 ] Tradition ascribes it to Ezra , a scribe and priest of the fifth century BC, whom the book identifies with the sixth-century figure Shealtiel .

[ 3 ] : 37 2 Esdras forms a part of the canon of Scripture in the Ethiopian Orthodox Church (an Oriental Orthodoxy body), though it is reckoned among the apocrypha by Roman Catholics and Protestants.

[ 4 ] Within Eastern Orthodoxy it forms a part of the canon [ 5 ] although its usage varies by different traditions. 2 Esdras was translated by Jerome as part of the Vulgate , though he placed it in an appendix.

[ 6 ] Naming conventions [ edit ] Main article: Esdras § Naming conventions As with 1 Esdras , some confusion exists about the numbering of this book. The Vulgate of Jerome includes only a single book of Ezra , but in the Clementine Vulgate , 1, 2, 3 and 4 Esdras are separate books. Protestant writers, after the Geneva Bible , called 1 and 2 Esdras of the Vulgate Ezra and Nehemiah , respectively, and called 3 and 4 Esdras of the Vulgate 1 Esdras and 2 Esdras, respectively. These then became the common names for these books in English Bibles.

[ 7 ] Medieval Latin manuscripts denoted it 4 Esdras, which to this day is the name used for chapters 3–14 in modern critical editions, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] which are typically in Latin , the language of its most complete exemplars.

[ 10 ] It appears in the Appendix to the Old Testament in the Slavonic Bible , where it is called 3 Esdras, and the Georgian Orthodox Bible numbers it 3 Ezra. This text is sometimes also known as Apocalypse of Ezra — chapters 3–14 known as the Jewish Apocalypse of Ezra or 4 Ezra; in modern critical editions, chapters 1–2 are named as 5 Ezra, and chapters 15–16 as 6 Ezra.

Bogaert speculates that the "fourth book of Ezra" referred to by Jerome most likely corresponds to modern 5 Ezra and 6 Ezra combined, and notes a number of Latin manuscripts where these chapters are together in an appendix.

[ 11 ] Contents [ edit ] 5 Ezra [ edit ] The first two chapters of 2 Esdras are found only in the Latin version of the book, and are called 5 Ezra by scholars.

[ 12 ] They are considered by most scholars to be Christian in origin; they assert God 's rejection of the Jews and describe a vision of the Son of God . These are generally considered to be late additions (possibly third century) to the work.

4 Ezra [ edit ] Chapters 3–14, or the great bulk of 2 Esdras, is a Jewish apocalypse , also sometimes known as 4 Ezra [ 12 ] or the Jewish Apocalypse of Ezra.

[ 13 ] The latter name should not be confused with a later work called the Greek Apocalypse of Ezra .

The Ethiopian Church considers 4 Ezra to be canonical , written during the Babylonian captivity , and calls it Izra Sutuel (ዕዝራ ሱቱኤል). It was also often cited by the Fathers of the Church . In the Eastern Armenian tradition, it is called 3 Ezra. It was written in the late first century CE following the destruction of the Second Temple .

[ 13 ] Among Greek Fathers of the Church, 4 Ezra is generally cited as Προφήτης Ἔσδρας Prophetes Esdras ("The Prophet Ezra") or Ἀποκάλυψις Ἔσδρα Apokalupsis Esdra ("Apocalypse of Ezra"). Most scholars agree that 4 Ezra was composed in Hebrew, [ 14 ] which was translated into Greek, and then to Latin, Armenian, Ethiopian, and Georgian, but the Hebrew and Greek editions have been lost.

Slightly differing Latin, Syriac , Arabic , Ethiopic , Georgian , and Armenian translations have survived in their entirety; the Greek version can be reconstructed, though without absolute certainty, from these different translations, while the Hebrew text remains more elusive. The modern Slavonic version is translated from the Latin.

A medieval stained-glass panel depicting the Archangel Uriel with Ezra 4 Ezra consists of seven visions of Ezra the scribe. The first vision takes place as Ezra is still in Babylon . He asks God how Israel can be kept in misery if God is just. The archangel Uriel is sent to answer the question, responding that God's ways cannot be understood by the human mind. Soon, however, the end would come, and God's justice would be made manifest. Similarly, in the second vision, Ezra asks why Israel was delivered up to the Babylonians, and is again told that man cannot understand this and that the end is near. In the third vision, Ezra asks why Israel does not possess the world. Uriel responds that the current state is a period of transition. Here follows a description of the fate of evil-doers and the righteous. Ezra asks whether the righteous may intercede for the unrighteous on Judgment Day , but is told that "Judgment Day is final".

[ 15 ] The next three visions are more symbolic in nature. The fourth is of a woman mourning for her only son. She is transformed into a city when she hears of the desolation of Zion. Uriel says that the woman is a symbol of Zion. The fifth vision concerns an eagle with three heads and 20 wings (12 large wings and eight smaller wings "over against them"). The eagle is rebuked by a lion and then burned. The explanation of this vision is that the eagle refers to the fourth kingdom of the vision of Daniel , with the wings and heads as rulers. The final scene is the triumph of the Messiah over the empire. The sixth vision is of a man, representing the Messiah, who breathes fire on a crowd that is attacking him. This man then turns to another peaceful multitude, which accepts him.

Ezra produces the 94 books ( Codex Amiatinus , eighth century) Finally, a vision of the restoration of scripture is related. God appears to Ezra in a bush and commands him to restore the Law . Ezra gathers five scribes and begins to dictate. After 40 days, he has produced 204 books, including 70 works to be published last. 2 Esdras 14:44–48 KJV: 44 In forty days they wrote two hundred and four books.

45 And it came to pass, when the forty days were filled, that the Highest spake, saying, The first that thou hast written publish openly, that the worthy and unworthy may read it: 46 But keep the seventy last, that thou mayest deliver them only to such as be wise among the people: 47 For in them is the spring of understanding, the fountain of wisdom, and the stream of knowledge.

48 And I did so.

The "seventy" might refer to the Septuagint , most of the apocrypha , or the lost books that are described in the Bible . But it is more probable that the number is just symbolic.

[ 16 ] Almost all Latin editions of the text have a large lacuna [ 17 ] of 70 verses between 7:35 and 7:36 that is missing because they trace their common origin to one early manuscript, Codex Sangermanensis I , from which an entire page had been cut out very early in its history. In 1875 Robert Lubbock Bensly published the lost verses [ 18 ] and in 1895 M.R. James oversaw a critical edition from Bensly's notes [ 19 ] restoring the lost verses from the complete text found in the Codex Colbertinus ; this edition is used in the Stuttgart edition of the Vulgate . The restored verses are numbered 7:35 to 7:105, with the former verses 7:36–7:70 renumbered to 7:106–7:140.

[ 20 ] For more information, see the article Codex Sangermanensis I .

Second Esdras turns around a radical spiritual conversion of Ezra in a vision, where he stops to comfort a sobbing woman who turns instantly into a great city (2 Esd. 10:25–27). On this pivotal event, one scholar writes that Ezra: is badly frightened, he loses consciousness and calls for his angelic guide. The experience described is unique, not just in 4 Ezra, but in the whole Jewish apocalyptic literature. Its intensity complements the pressure of unrelieved stress evident in the first part of the vision, and it resembles the major orientation of personality usually connected with religious conversion .

[ 3 ] : 31 The following verses (10:28–59) reveal that Ezra had a vision of the heavenly Jerusalem, the true city of Zion, which the angel of the Lord invites him to explore. As the angel tells Ezra at the end of Chapter 10 in the Authorised Version : And therefore fear not, let not thine heart be affrighted, but go thy way in, and see the beauty and greatness of the building, as much as thine eyes be able to see; and then shalt thou hear as much as thine ears may comprehend.

For thou art blessed above many other and art called with the Highest and so are but few.

But tomorrow at night thou shalt remain here and so shall the Highest show thee visions of the high things which the Most High will do unto them that dwell upon earth in the last days .
So I slept that night and another like as he commanded me (2 Esd. 10:55–59).

6 Ezra [ edit ] The last two chapters, also called 6 Ezra by scholars, [ 12 ] and found in the Latin, but not in the Eastern texts, predict wars and rebuke sinners. Many assume that they probably date from a much later period (perhaps late third century) and may be Christian in origin; though not certain, they possibly were added at the same time as the first two chapters of the Latin version. They likely are Jewish in origin, however; 15:57–59 have been found in Greek, which most scholars agree was translated from a Hebrew original.

Author and criticism [ edit ] The main body of the book appears to be written for consolation in a period of great distress (one scholarly hypothesis is that it dates to Titus ' destruction of the Second Temple in 70 CE ).

[ 21 ] The author seeks answers, similar to Job 's quest for understanding the meaning of suffering, but the author does not like or desire only the answer that was given to Job.

Critics question whether even the main body of the book, not counting the chapters that exist only in the Latin version and in Greek fragments, has a single author. Kalisch, De Faye, and Charles hold that no fewer than five people worked on the text. However, Gunkel points to the unity in character and holds that the book is written by a single author; the author of 2 Esdras has also been suggested to have written the Syriac Apocalypse of Baruch .

[ 21 ] In any case, the two texts may date from about the same time, and one almost certainly depends on the other.

[ 21 ] Critics [ who?

] have widely debated the origin of the book. Hidden under two layers of translation, determining whether the author was Roman, Alexandrian, or Judean is impossible.

The scholarly interpretation of the eagle being the Roman Empire (the eagle in the fifth vision, whose heads might be Vespasian , Titus , and Domitian if such is the case) and the destruction of the temple would indicate that the probable date of composition lies toward the end of the first century, perhaps 90–96, though some suggest a date as late as 218.

[ 21 ] Usage [ edit ] The book is found in the Orthodox Slavonic Bible ( Ostrog Bible , Elizabeth Bible , and later consequently Russian Synodal Bible ).

[ 22 ] 2 Esdras is in the Apocrypha of the King James Version, and Pope Clement VIII placed it in an appendix to the Vulgate along with 3 Esdras and the Prayer of Manasseh "lest they perish entirely".

[ 23 ] The chapters corresponding to 4 Ezra, i.e. 2 Esdras 3–14, make up the Book of II Izra , aka Izra Sutuel , canonical in the Ethiopian Orthodox Church ; it was also widely cited by early Fathers of the Church, particularly Ambrose of Milan , as the 'third book of Esdras'.

Jerome states that it is apocryphal.

[ 24 ] It may also be found in many larger English Bibles included as part of the Biblical apocrypha , as they exist in the King James Version, the Revised Version, the Revised Standard Version, and the earliest editions of the Catholic Douay–Rheims Bible , among others.

[ a ] The introitus of the traditional Requiem Mass of the Extraordinary Form of the 1962 Missal in the Catholic Church is loosely based on 2:34–35: "Eternal rest grant unto them, O Lord, and let perpetual light shine upon them." Several other liturgical prayers are taken from the book. The same chapter, verses 36 and 37, is cited in the Introit of Pentecost Tuesday, " Accipite jucunditatem gloriae vestrae, alleluia: gratias agentes Deo, alleluia: qui vos ad caelestia regna vocavit, alleluia, alleluia, alleluia . Ps. 77 Attendite, popule meus, legem meam: inclinate aurem vestram in verba oris mei. Gloria Patri. Accipite . – Receive the delight of your glory, alleluia, giving thanks to God, alleluia, Who hath called ye to the heavenly kingdoms, alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.

Psalm 77 Attend, O my people, to my law: incline your ears to the words of my mouth. Glory be. Receive.” [ 25 ] The Alleluia verse Crastina die for the Vigil Mass of Christmas in the Roman Missal is taken from chapter 16, verse 52.

Christopher Columbus quoted verse 6:42, which describes the Earth as being created with six parts land and one part water, in his appeal to the Catholic Monarchs for financial support for his first voyage of exploration.

[ 26 ] The book is appointed as a scripture reading in the Ordinariate’s Evensong service for All Hallows' Eve.

[ 27 ] The work is included in the NRSV -based Renovaré Spiritual Formation Bible .

See also [ edit ] Esdras 1 Esdras Deuterocanonical books in Orthodox Christianity Ostrog Bible Vision of Ezra Footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b Among many, the KJB , RSV , NRSV , NEB , REB , and GNB . More in naming conventions .

^ 4 Ezra is the title used in modern English translations as in Charlesworth's.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] Sources [ edit ] ^ ISBN 978-0-385-09630-0 .

^ NETBible, Apocalyptic Esdras Archived September 26, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Stone, Michael Edward (1990).

Fourth Ezra: A Commentary on the Book of Fourth Ezra . Hermeneia.

Fortress Press .

ISBN 978-0-8006-6026-0 .

^ For example, it is listed with the apocrypha in the Anglican Thirty-Nine Articles of Religion .

^ Coogan, Michael (March 2018).

The New Oxford Annotated Bible: New Revised Standard Version: An Ecumenical Study Bible (5th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 1839, 1841.

ISBN 978-0-19-027605-8 .

^ "4 Ezra: A Biblical Book You've Probably Never Read" . 26 September 2018.

^ "Esdras." Catholic Encyclopedia .

^ Bensley, R.

The Fourth Book of Ezra, the Latin Edition edited from the MSS Cambridge 1895 ^ Metzger, B. M. "The Fourth Book of Ezra". In J. Charlesworth, ed., The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha . vol 1, p. 517ss.

^ See for example Souvay, C. (1909). Esdras. In The Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company. Retrieved January 10, 2020 from New Advent.

^ Bogaert, Pierre-Maurice (2000). "Les livres d'Esdras et leur numérotation dans l'histoire du canon de la Bible latin".

Revue Bénédictine .

110 ( 1– 2): 5– 26.

doi : 10.1484/J.RB.5.100750 .

^ a b c See for example B. M. Metzger, "The Fourth Book of Ezra", in Charlesworth, James H. (ed.) The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha, Vol 1 (1983). Garden City, NY: Doubleday. p. 517.

ISBN 978-0-385-09630-0 ^ a b Theodore A. Bergren (2010). Michael D. Coogan (ed.).

The New Oxford Annotated Apocrypha: New Revised Standard Version . New York, USA: Oxford University Press. pp.

317– 318.

ISBN 9780195289619 .

^ Wong, A. C. K.; Penner, K. M.; Miller, D. M. (2010).

"4 Ezra" .

The Online Critical Pseudepigrapha . Atlanta: The Society of Biblical Literature . Retrieved April 12, 2019 .

^ 2 Esd 7:102–104, GNB ^ Ossandón Widow, Juan Carlos (2018).

The Origins of the Canon of the Hebrew Bible: An Analysis of Josephus and 4 Ezra . Brill. pp.

170– 176.

ISBN 9789004381612 .

^ Article from Early Jewish Writings ^ The Missing Fragment of the Latin Translation of the Fourth Book of Ezra (Cambridge UP, 1875) ^ The Fourth Book of Ezra (Texts & Studies 3.2, ed by J.A. Robinson, Cambridge UP, 1895) ^ Biblia Sacra Vulgata , 4th edition, 1994, ISBN 3-438-05303-9 .

^ a b c d Jewish Encyclopedia article ^ Monk, Anonymous (1986).

These Truths We Hold - The Holy Orthodox Church: Her Life and Teachings . Pennsylvania: Saint Tikhons Seminary Press.

^ Clementine Vulgate, Note to the Appendix ^ "St. Jerome, The Prologue on the Book of Ezra: English translation" .

^ "Actual Apocrypha in the Liturgy" .

Catholic News Live .

^ Longenecker, Bruce W. (1995).

Two Esdras . A&C Black. p. 112.

ISBN 9781850757269 .

^ Ordinariates Established by Anglicanorum Coetibus (11 April 2022).

"CTS Divine Worship Daily Office" .

Isuu . Catholic Truth Society. p. 66. Archived from the original on 24 February 2023 . Retrieved 2 November 2023 .

Further reading [ edit ] Longenecker, Bruce (1995).

2 Esdras . Guides to Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press .

ISBN 978-1850757269 .

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: The King James Version of 2 Esdras Holy Bible, Douay-Rheims Version, O.T. Part 2 at Project Gutenberg . (See in the appendix: The Fovrth Booke of Esdras in a 1610 translation. Also included is Robert Lubbock Bensly 's 1874 translation of a "rediscovered" 70-verse fragment (7:36–105) on a page that was omitted from the 1610 translation, though present in all earlier versions.) Revised Standard Version (includes the missing page with 7:36–105) 2 Esdras at earlyjewishwritings.com Latin text of 2 (4) Esdras World Wide Study Bible: 2 Esdras Catholic Encyclopedia: Esdras: The Books of Esdras: IV Esdras Jewish Encyclopedia: Esdras, Books of: II Esdras "Ezra, Fourth Book of" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

2 Esdras 1 —NRSV King James version of 2 Esdras .

Ezra/Esdras Chart Archived 2019-12-24 at the Wayback Machine 2 Ezra: 2012 Critical Translation with Audio Drama at biblicalaudio v t e Jewish apocrypha Apocrypha in the Torah Genesis Apocryphon Life of Adam and Eve Testament of Qahat Visions of Amram Book of Jubilees 1 Enoch 2 Enoch 3 Enoch Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs Testament of Abraham Apocalypse of Abraham Assumption of Moses Joseph and Aseneth Apocrypha in Nevi'im Letter of Jeremiah Ascension of Isaiah 1 Baruch 2 Baruch 3 Baruch Apocrypha in Ketuvim Book of Wisdom Psalms of Solomon Testament of Job 1 Esdras 2 Esdras Psalm 151 Psalms 152–155 Additions to the Book of Esther Additions to Daniel Prayer of Manasseh Other apocrypha Book of Sirach Book of Judith Book of Tobit 1 Maccabees 2 Maccabees 3 Maccabees 4 Maccabees Letter of Aristeas Sibylline Oracles Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum v t e Books of the Bible Old Testament Hebrew Bible (protocanon) Genesis Exodus Leviticus Numbers Deuteronomy Joshua Judges Ruth 1–2 Samuel 1–2 Kings 1–2 Chronicles Ezra Nehemiah Esther Job Psalms Proverbs Ecclesiastes Song of Songs Isaiah Jeremiah Lamentations Ezekiel Daniel Hosea Joel Amos Obadiah Jonah Micah Nahum Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi Deuterocanon or apocrypha Catholic , Eastern Orthodox & others Tobit Judith Additions to Esther 1 Maccabees 2 Maccabees Wisdom Sirach Baruch / Letter of Jeremiah Additions to Daniel Susanna Song of the Three Children Bel and the Dragon Eastern Orthodox & others 1 Esdras 2 Esdras Prayer of Manasseh Psalm 151 3 Maccabees 4 Maccabees Odes Orthodox Tewahedo Enoch Jubilees 1, 2, and 3 Meqabyan Paralipomena of Baruch Broader canon Syriac Peshitta Psalms 152–155 2 Baruch Beta Israel Testaments of the Three Patriarchs Abraham Isaac Jacob New Testament Canon Matthew Mark Luke John Acts Romans 1 Corinthians 2 Corinthians Galatians Ephesians Philippians Colossians 1 Thessalonians 2 Thessalonians 1 Timothy 2 Timothy Titus Philemon Hebrews James 1 Peter 2 Peter 1 John 2 John 3 John Jude Revelation Antilegomena Acts of Paul Apocalypse of Peter Didache Gospel of the Hebrews Epistle of Barnabas 1 Clement 2 Clement 3 Corinthians Shepherd of Hermas Subdivisions Chapters and verses Pentateuch Historical books Wisdom books ( Poetic Books ) Prophetic books Major prophets Minor prophets Gospels List Synoptic Epistles Pauline Johannine Pastoral Catholic Apocalyptic literature Development Authorship Jewish canon Intertestamental period Christian canon Old Testament canon New Testament canon Antilegomena Apocrypha Jewish Old Testament New Testament Pseudepigrapha Old Testament Dating the Bible Manuscripts Dead Sea Scrolls Samaritan Pentateuch Septuagint Targum Diatessaron Muratorian fragment Peshitta Vetus Latina Vulgate Masoretic Text New Testament manuscript categories New Testament papyri New Testament uncials Related Bible version debate English Bible translations Other books referenced in the Bible Additional Scriptures Studies Biblical and Quranic narratives Synod of Hippo Textual criticism Category Portal WikiProject v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Sweden Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=2_Esdras&oldid=1285517800 " Categories : 1st-century books 3rd-century books 3rd-century Christian texts Old Testament books Christian apocalyptic writings Jewish eschatology Works of unknown authorship Texts in the Septuagint 1st-century Christian texts Uriel Jewish apocrypha Texts attributed to Ezra Old Testament apocrypha Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2023 Articles with Project Gutenberg links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 14 April 2025, at 05:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents 2 Esdras 34 languages Add topic

