Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Student years 1.3 Professional career 2 Music Toggle Music subsection 2.1 Works 2.2 Style 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Michael Finnissy 8 languages Deutsch Français Italiano مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Русский Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English composer and pianist This biography of a living person includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately , especially if potentially libelous or harmful. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( June 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Michael Peter Finnissy (born 17 March 1946) is an English composer, pianist, and pedagogue . An immensely prolific composer, his music is "notable for its dramatic urgency and expressive immediacy".

[ 1 ] Although he rejects the label, he is often regarded as one of the foremost composers of the New Complexity movement.

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Michael Finnissy was born at 77 Claverdale Road in Tulse Hill , London at roughly two in the morning on 17 March 1946 to Rita Isolene ( née Parsonson) and George Norman Finnissy.

[ 2 ] His father was employed at the London City Council .

When he was four, he received his first piano lessons from his great-aunt Rose Louise (Rosie) Hopwood, soon after writing his first compositions.

He attended Hawes Down Infant and Junior schools, Bromley Technical High School , and Beckenham and Penge Grammar School , and excelled in graphic art, mathematics, and English literature.

Student years [ edit ] Finnissy received the William Hurlstone composition prize at the Croydon Music Festival, a factor which assisted his parents' decision to let him apply to music college.

He was then awarded a Foundation Scholarship to study at the Royal College of Music where he then studied with Bernard Stevens and Humphrey Searle . Soon after, he received an Octavia travelling scholarship to study in Italy with Roman Vlad . Finnissy was then able to befriend Brian Ferneyhough .

In 1968, he wrote his first proper compositions.

Professional career [ edit ] To earn money for his classes he took up a job as a répétiteur and freelanced at the London Contemporary Dance School and founded a department there, as well as working with numerous choreographers.

In 1972 he made his concert début in the Galerie Schwartzes Kloster in Freiburg im Breisgau . Meanwhile, he had been appearing around Europe.

Finnissy's first job as a composition teacher was at Dartington Summer School where he taught along with his colleague Ferneyhough and signed contracts with numerous publishers, including Oxford University Press .

He had been a member of the ensemble Suoraan (founded by James Clarke and Richard Emsley ) and then its artistic director since the early 1970s, then joining Ixion (founded and still directed by Andrew Toovey) in 1987 - in both of these groups he not only played the piano but also conducted concerts.

Finnissy was invited to join by Justin Connolly to join the International Society for Contemporary Music and was president from 1990 to 1996. He is currently an Honorary Member.

He has attached to C.O.M.A. (initially known as the East London Late Starters Orchestra) since its inception, and is composer-in-residence Victorian College of the Arts and to the Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras in Sydney . He has taught at the Royal Academy of Music , the University of Sussex , and is professor of composition at the University of Southampton [ 1 ] and composer-in-residence at St. John's College, Cambridge . He won a competition to supply a violin solo test piece to the 1990 Carl Flesch International Violin Competition with Enek .

[ 3 ] Finnissy completed his Verdi Transcriptions for piano (which he started in 1972) in 2005.

He is homosexual .

[ 4 ] Music [ edit ] Works [ edit ] For a listing of Finnissy's compositions, see List of compositions by Michael Finnissy .

Style [ edit ] Finnissy is a profusely prolific composer, having written over 400 pieces for numerous ensembles, combinations, and instruments. His works for the piano are notable for their extreme demands on technique. They include his 36 Verdi Transcriptions , written between 1972 and 2005.

Finnissy is concerned with the political aspects of music, and he believes that all music is ' programmatic ' to some degree, that is, a composition exists in not just the composer's mind, but inside a culture that reflects both the extra-musical and purely musical concerns of the composer. He rejects the idea that music is unable to express anything other than itself (as Stravinsky said); Finnissy considers music a force for change. His engagement with political and social themes became more frequent as his career progressed. For example, the influence of homosexual themes and concerns began to enter his work; as in Shameful Vice in 1994, and more explicitly in Seventeen Immortal Homosexual Poets in 1997.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Richard Barrett James Dillon Brian Ferneyhough Ian Pace References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Cross 2001 .

^ Finnissy, Michael.

"Biography" . Archived from the original on 1 July 2021.

^ Malcolm Miller (1992). "Old and New".

The Musical Times .

133 (1789): 126.

doi : 10.2307/966427 .

JSTOR 966427 .

^ Hind, Rolf (12 September 2015).

"Queer pitch: is there such a thing?" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 7 September 2023 .

Sources Cross, Jonathan. 2001, "Finnissy, Michael (Peter)".

The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , 2nd edition, edited by Stanley Sadie and John Tyrrell . London: Macmillan. Updated by Ian Pace, 26 May 2010, Grove Music Online , edited by Deane Root.

Bibliography [ edit ] Arnone, Augustus. 2013/2014. "The Ear Is Not A Camera: The Divide Between Visual And Acoustic Perceptual Habits In Finnissy's The History of Photography in Sound ".

The Open Space Magazine 15/16: 251–268.

Barrett, Richard. 1995. "Michael Finnissy: An Overview".

Contemporary Music Review 13, no. 1:23–43.

Bortz, Graziela. 2003.

Rhythm in the Music of Brian Ferneyhough, Michael Finnissy, and Arthur Kampela: A Guide for Performers .

Ph.D. Thesis, City University of New York.

Brougham, Henrietta, Christopher Fox, and Ian Pace (eds.). 1997.

Uncommon Ground: The Music of Michael Finnissy . Aldershot, Hants., and Brookfield, VT: Ashgate.

ISBN 1-85928-356-X .

Pace, Ian. 1996. "The Panorama of Michael Finnissy: I".

Tempo , no. 196 (1996), 25–35.

Pace, Ian. 1997. "The Panorama of Michael Finnissy: II".

Tempo , no. 201 (1997), 7–16.

Steenhuisen, Paul. "Interview with Michael Finnissy". In Sonic Mosaics: Conversations with Composers . Edmonton: University of Alberta Press, 2009.

ISBN 978-0-88864-474-9 Toop, Richard . 1988. "Four Facets of the 'New Complexity'".

Contact , no. 32:4–50.

External links [ edit ] Official website Oxford University Press: Finnissy Finnissy Programme on BBC 4 (2007) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Latvia Israel Finland Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz BRAHMS Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Michael_Finnissy&oldid=1301101581 " Categories : Michael Finnissy 1946 births 20th-century English male musicians 20th-century English classical composers 21st-century English classical composers 21st-century English male composers Academics of the Royal Academy of Music Academics of the Royal College of Music Academics of the University of Southampton Academics of the University of Sussex English gay musicians English LGBTQ composers English male opera composers English opera composers Gay composers LGBTQ classical composers Living people People educated at Beckenham and Penge County Grammar School People from Tulse Hill Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from June 2019 All articles lacking in-text citations Use dmy dates from December 2014 Use British English from December 2014 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 03:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Michael Finnissy 8 languages Add topic

