Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 In argumentation Toggle In argumentation subsection 2.1 Argumentation scheme for instrumental practical reasoning 2.2 Argumentation scheme for value-based practical reasoning 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Practical reason 7 languages العربية Dansk Español فارسی 한국어 Norsk bokmål Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Use of reason to decide how to act In philosophy , practical reason is the use of reason to decide how to act . It contrasts with theoretical reason, often called speculative reason , the use of reason to decide what to believe . For example, agents use practical reason to decide whether to build a telescope , but theoretical reason to decide which of two theories of light and optics is the best.

Overview [ edit ] Practical reason is understood by most philosophers as determining a plan of action.

Thomistic ethics defines the first principle of practical reason as "good is to be done and pursued, and evil is to be avoided." [ 1 ] For Kant , practical reason has a law-abiding quality because the categorical imperative is understood to be binding one to one's duty rather than subjective preferences.

Utilitarians tend to see reason as an instrument for the satisfactions of wants and needs.

In classical philosophical terms, it is very important to distinguish three domains of human activity: theoretical reason, which investigates the truth of contingent events as well as necessary truths ; practical reason, which determines whether a prospective course of action is worth pursuing; and productive or technical reason, which attempts to find the best means for a given end.

Aristotle viewed philosophical activity as the highest activity of the human being and gave pride of place to metaphysics or wisdom. Since Descartes practical judgment and reasoning have been treated with less respect because of the demand for greater certainty and an infallible method to justify beliefs.

In argumentation [ edit ] Practical reasoning is basically goal-directed reasoning from an agent's goal, and from some action selected as a means to carry out the goal, to the agent's reasoned decision to carry out the action. The agent can be a person or a technical device, such as a robot or  a software device for multi-agent communications. It is a type of reasoning used all the time in everyday life and all kinds of technology where autonomous reasoning is required.

Argumentation theorists have identified two kinds of practical reasoning: instrumental practical reasoning that does not explicitly take values into account, [ 2 ] and value-based practical reasoning .

[ 3 ] The following argumentation scheme for instrumental practical reasoning is given in Walton, Reed & Macagno (2008) . The pronoun I represents an autonomous agent.

Argumentation scheme for instrumental practical reasoning [ edit ] MAJOR PREMISE: I have a goal G.

MINOR PREMISE: Carrying out this action A is a means to realize G.

CONCLUSION: Therefore, I ought (practically speaking) to carry out this action A.

Critical questions CQ1: What other goals do I have that should be considered that might conflict with G?

CQ2: What alternative actions to my bringing about A that would also bring about G should be considered?

CQ3: Among bringing about A and these alternative actions, which is arguably the most efficient?

CQ4: What grounds are there for arguing that it is practically possible for me to bring about A?

CQ5: What consequences of my bringing about A should also be taken into account?

It can be seen from CQ5  that argumentation from consequences is closely related to the scheme for practical reasoning.
It has often been disputed in philosophy whether practical reasoning is purely instrumental or whether it needs to be based on values. Argument from values is combined with practical reasoning in the type of argumentation called value-based practical reasoning.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] The following argumentation scheme for value-based practical reasoning is given in Atkinson, Bench-Capon & McBurney (2005 , pp. 2–3).

Argumentation scheme for value-based practical reasoning [ edit ] In the current circumstances R we should perform action A to achieve New Circumstances S which will realize some goal G which will promote some value V.

Practical reasoning is used in arguments, but also in explanations used to draw conclusions about an agent's goals, motives or intentions, based on reports of what the agent said or did.

Practical reasoning is centrally important in artificial intelligence, and also vitally important in many other fields such as law, medicine and engineering. It has been known as a distinctive type of argumentation as far back as Aristotle.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Action theory (philosophy) Critique of Practical Reason Decisional balance , or balance-of-considerations reasoning Humeanism § Practical reason Philosophy of action Phronesis Pure practical reason Rationality Rationality and Power Rhetorical reason Tacit knowledge References [ edit ] ^ Summa Theologiæ , I-IIª q. 94 a. 2 .

^ Walton, Douglas ; Reed, Chris; Macagno, Fabrizio (2008).

Argumentation Schemes . New York: Cambridge University Press . pp.

94– 95.

^ a b Atkinson, Katie; Bench-Capon, Trevor; McBurney, Peter (2005). "A Dialogue Game Protocol for Multi-Agent Argument over Proposals for Action".

Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems .

11 (2): 153– 71.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.130.8439 .

doi : 10.1007/s10458-005-1166-x .

S2CID 1824624 .

^ Atkinson, Katie; Bench-Capon, Trevor; McBurney, Peter (2006). "Computational Representation of Practical Argument".

Synthese .

152 (2): 157– 206.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.127.8521 .

doi : 10.1007/s11229-005-3488-2 .

S2CID 5710585 .

^ Macagno, Fabrizio; Walton, Douglas (2008).

"Persuasive Definitions: Values, Meanings and Implicit Disagreements" .

Informal Logic .

28 (3): 203– 28.

doi : 10.22329/il.v28i3.594 .

Sources [ edit ] Elijah Millgram, ed., Varieties of Practical Reasoning , Cambridge, Massachusetts:  MIT Press, 2001.

ISBN 0-262-63220-9 .

Joseph Raz, ed., Practical Reasoning , Oxford:  Oxford University Press, 1978.

ISBN 0-19-875041-2 .

Charles Taylor, "Explanation and Practical Reason", in Philosophical Arguments , Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1995.

ISBN 0-674-66476-0 .

External links [ edit ] Wallace, R. Jay (26 March 2014).

"Practical Reason" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Christopher, Toner (March 2010).

"Medieval Theories of Practical Reason" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Celano, Anthony (3 December 2014).

"Medieval Theories of Practical Reason" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Millgram, Elijah (11 May 2016).

"Practical Reason and the Structure of Actions" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Practical_reason&oldid=1289914440 " Categories : Reasoning Action (philosophy) Concepts in epistemology Concepts in ethics Critical thinking Philosophy of logic Thought Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017 Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 11 May 2025, at 17:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Practical reason 7 languages Add topic

