Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Contributing disciplines 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Forest informatics 2 languages فارسی 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Combined science of forestry and informatics Forest informatics is the combined science of forestry and informatics , with a special emphasis on collection, management, and processing of data, information and knowledge, and the incorporation of informatic concepts and theories specific to enrich forest management and forest science ; it has a similar relationship to library science and information science .

It is an interdisciplinary science primarily concerned with the collection, classification, manipulation, storage, retrieval and dissemination of information . Information, in this context, includes both human and machine readable documents . Examples of human readable documents include maps , field data sheets, operational schedules, and long term asset management plans with narrative text. Machine readable documents include files for geographic information systems (GIS), Global Positioning Systems (GPS), and other applications like spreadsheets , and relational database management systems .

As in management science , Forest Informatics uses decision support systems , mathematical modeling , statistics , and algorithms from engineering , operations research , computer science , and artificial intelligence to support decision-making activities. Common forestry problems include harvest scheduling, model fitting, optimal sampling, remote sensing , crew assignment, image classification, treatment timing, and log bucking problems, many of which can be formulated as optimization problems (e.g.

generalized assignment problem , traveling salesman problem , knapsack problem , job shop scheduling , and vehicle routing problems ).  The practice includes information processing and the engineering of information systems , decision support systems , GIS, and GPS. The research field includes studies the structure, algorithms, behavior, and interactions of natural and artificial systems that store, process, access and communicate information about forested ecosystems.

History [ edit ] In 1970, J. G. Grevatt wrote an article titled, "Management Information and Computers in Forestry".

[ 1 ] In the article, the author describes and discusses different dimensions of management information (i.e. operation, expenditure, location, and time) including the nature of management information and decisions, management information in forestry, the management information system itself, the application of computers, the structure of a computer based system, comparisons between clerical and computer systems, and the impact on the field manager. The author concludes that the use of computers to process management data may be justified on grounds of cost and improved information in organizations of a critical size.

At the time of that article, computers, databases, and geographic information systems were still in their infancy and tools like the Global Positioning Systems of today were yet invented. Management database systems for business were more prevalent. Over the next 30 years, computers became more powerful, smaller, and less expensive. Relational database management systems had become commonplace in business, interrogating the computer system had become standardized with languages like SQL, and faster networks for data and information integration have become highly integrated.  In that time, geographic information systems that could run on desktop computers and could be customized for various tasks were also developed, but as
separate systems.

Within the last 10 years, [ when?

] specialized fields of study at the university level are offered at the several forestry schools where students learn the principles of quantification, modeling, descriptive and predictive analyses of natural resources attributes needed for sound management of forested ecosystems.

At the small forester practitioner level, more software "back-end" programs have become available to model likely forest growth outcomes based on treatment prescriptions. These are provided by private businesses, such as Assisisoft, as well as government agencies, such as the U.S. Forestry Service's NED [ 2 ] system. The basic functions of the NED system is commonly used among American consulting foresters, as it is free, although a small proportion of that group uses the full modeling capabilities of the software. With the prevalence of smartphone and tablet access, the computing power available in the woods is now much higher than it was just a few years ago when PocketPC-based systems were prevalent. Microsoft announced it will deprecate the PocketPC platform in March 2013. New apps, such as Forest Metrix, [ 3 ] are now becoming available for foresters and timber cruisers to employ their devices for data collection for later export into more sophisticated software.

Software specifically devoted to analyzing management decisions for forested ecosystems have been developed, and used in several large
scale planning projects. For example, the Ecosystem Management Decision Support (EMDS) system is an application framework for knowledge-based decision support of ecological analysis and planning. Open source software solutions have also become more widely accepted as well, as is seen in the expansion of ecological extensions for statistical tools like R . A recent example would be the book written by Andrew Robinson and Jeff D. Hamann about using R for forest analytics.

[ 4 ] In 2006, the United Nations declared 2011 to be International Year of Forests .

Forest Informatics, Inc. has developed a postgresql template, a set of software agents , and a collection of reports, maps, and data feeds . The application uses an intelligent agent architecture to preemptively generate possible strategic, tactical, and operational solutions for forest managers.

[ citation needed ] Contributing disciplines [ edit ] Math Artificial intelligence Computer science Information science Information theory Information technology Biodiversity Informatics Ecoinformatics Evolutionary informatics Geoinformatics Mathematical logic Graph theory Computational geometry Geographic Information Systems See also [ edit ] Environmental informatics Conservation biology Farm Forestry Toolbox Forestknowledge.net Global Forest Information Service i-Tree Sustainability References [ edit ] ^ Grevatt, J. G. (1970). "Management Information and Computers in Forestry".

Forestry .

43 : 17– 30.

doi : 10.1093/forestry/43.1.17 .

^ "USDA Forest Service" .

nrs.fs.fed.us .

^ "Forest Inventory App for Timber Cruising by Forestry Consultant, Foresters" .

ForestMetrix .

^ Forest Analytics with R - An Introduction - Andrew P. Robinson - Springer . springer.com.

v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline v t e Information processing Information processes information processes by function perception attention influence operating communication reasoning learning storing decision-making information processing abstractions event processing sign processesing signal processing data processing stream processing agent processing state processing Information processors natural nature as information processing humans as information processing systems society as information processing system mixed mixed reality brain–computer interface physical computing human–computer interaction artificial processors and processes bio-inspired computing ubiquitous computing artificial brain and mind uploading virtual reality virtual world Information processing theories and concepts in biology computational and systems biology genetic informatics and cellular computing computational neuroscience and neurocomputing in cognitive psychology information processing theory mind and intelligence cognitive informatics and neuroinformatics behavior informatics in computer science neural computation computation theory algorithms and information structures computational circuits artificial intelligence in philosophy computational theory of mind philosophy of information philosophy of artificial intelligence interdisciplinary information theory decision theory systems theory other infosphere inforg Decoding the Universe information overload Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Forest_informatics&oldid=1294843643 " Categories : Forest management Forest modelling Information science Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from March 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2018 This page was last edited on 10 June 2025, at 04:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Forest informatics 2 languages Add topic

