Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Career 2 Works 3 Images 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Ignace-Gaston Pardies 6 languages العربية Español Français Italiano Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French Catholic Jesuit priest and scientist (1636–1673) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( September 2022 ) Deux machines propres à faire les quadrans , 1687 Ignace-Gaston Pardies (5 September 1636 – 21 April 1673) [ 1 ] was a French Catholic Jesuit priest and scientist.

Career [ edit ] Pardies was born in Pau , France, the son of an advisor at the local assembly. He entered the Society of Jesus on 17 November 1652 and for a time taught classical literature; during this period he composed a number of short Latin works, in prose and verse. After his ordination, he taught philosophy and mathematics at the Collège de Clermont in Paris, which would eventually become the Lycée Louis-le-Grand . His earliest scientific work is the Horologium Thaumanticum Duplex (Paris, 1662), in which is described an instrument he had invented for constructing various kinds of sundials . Three years later appeared his Dissertatio de Motu et Natura Cometarum , published separately in Latin and in French (Bordeaux, 1665). His La Statique (Paris, 1673) argued that Galileo 's theory was not exact. This, along with Discours du mouvement local (Paris, 1670), and the manuscript Traité complet d'Optique , in which he followed the undulatory theory of light (which identifies it as a harmonic vibration), form part of a general work on physics which he had planned.

Traité complet d'Optique had been studied by Pierre Ango (1640–1694) a confrere of Pardies for his Book L`Optique [ 2 ] which he published in 1682 after Pardies early death. The Manuscript has also been mentioned by Christiaan Huygens in his Treatise on Light . Huygens himself mentioned in 1668 that it has been Pardies' Theory that the speed of light is finite.

[ 3 ] He initially opposed Isaac Newton 's theory of refraction and his letters together with Newton's replies (which so satisfied Pardies that he withdrew his objections) are found in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society for 1672 and 1673. A proponent of mechanism , his Discours de la Connaissance des Bestes (Paris, 1672) combated Descartes 's views on animals, but did so very weakly, which led many to view it as a covert defence rather than a refutation, an impression which Pardies himself afterwards endeavoured to destroy. His Elémens de géométrie (Paris, 1671) was translated into Latin and English. He left in manuscript a work entitled Art de la Guerre and a celestial atlas comprising six charts, published after his death (Paris, 1673–74). His collected mathematical and physical works were published in French (The Hague, 1691) and in Latin (Amsterdam, 1694). He was a member of the academy of anatomist Pierre Michon Bourdelot.

Deux machines propres à faire les quadrans (1687). Plate In 1674, Pardies published the star atlas Globi coelestis in tabulas planas redacti descriptio in Paris. The atlas was partially based on the work of another French Jesuit scientist Thomas Gouye .

[ 4 ] The atlas was engraved by G. Vallet and dedicated to Johan Friedrich, Duke of Braunschweig-Luneburg. The constellation figures are drawn from Uranometria , but they were carefully reworked and adapted to a broader view of the sky.

[ 4 ] In 1693, a newer edition was published and in 1700 another edition appeared. They include new information, such as the paths of comets observed since 1674. The atlas uses gnomonic projection so that the plates make up a cube of the universe. The atlas served as a model for the star charts of William Rutter Dawes published in 1844.

[ 5 ] Pardies died of fever contracted whilst ministering to the prisoners of Bicêtre Hospital , near Paris.

In 1690, the Elémens was translated into Manchu for the Kangxi Emperor under the title Gi ho yuwan ben bithe .

[ 6 ] Works [ edit ] Elémens de géométrie (in French). Paris: Sébastien Mabre-Cramoisy. 1683.

Deux machines propres à faire les quadrans (in French). Paris: Sébastien Mabre-Cramoisy. 1687.

Statique (in French). Paris: Sébastien Mabre-Cramoisy. 1688.

Images [ edit ] Globi coelestis in tabulas planas redacti descriptio Plate 1: northern circumpolar sky Plate 2: equatorial region centred on right ascension 0 h ( Pisces ) Plate 3: equatorial region centred on right ascension 6 h ( Gemini ) Plate 4: equatorial region centred on right ascension 12 h ( Virgo ) Plate 5: equatorial region centred on right ascension 18 h ( Sagittarius ) Plate 6: southern circumpolar sky See also [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Ignace-Gaston Pardies .

List of Roman Catholic scientist-clerics Notes [ edit ] ^ Ziggelaar, August (1971).

Le physicien Ignace Gaston Pardies S.J. (1636–1673) . Odense University Press.

ISBN 87-7492-047-2 .

(in French) ^ L'Optique at Google Books ^ "Cela s`accorde avec l`hypothese du P.Pardies que la lumiere ne s`estend pas dans un instant, ... This is according to the theory of Reverend Pardies, that light does not spread instantaneously, ..." https://archive.org/stream/oeuvrescompltesd16huyg#page/184/mode/2up ^ a b "Ignace Gaston Pardies: [Celestial Map of the Southern Hemisphere]" . Barry Lawrence Ruderman Antique Maps Inc . Retrieved 1 May 2015 .

^ "Plate 1: Ursa Major, Ursa Minor, Perseus, and other constellations" .

David Rumsey Map Collection . Retrieved 8 May 2015 .

^ Marta E. Hanson, "The Significance of Manchu Medical Sources in the Qing," Proceedings of the First North American Conference on Manchu Studies (Portland, OR, 9–10 May 2003) (Harrassowitz, 2006), Vol. 1, pp. 131–175, at 143–144.

Photograph References [ edit ] Attribution This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Ignace-Gaston Pardies ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

cites: Sommervogel , Bibliothèque de la Compagnie de Jésus (Brussels, 1895) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Greece Sweden Vatican Israel Belgium Academics zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ignace-Gaston_Pardies&oldid=1200500056 " Categories : 1636 births 1673 deaths 17th-century French Jesuits French physicists People from Pau, Pyrénées-Atlantiques 17th-century French scientists Jesuit scientists Lycée Louis-le-Grand teachers Hidden categories: Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from September 2022 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from September 2022 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Use dmy dates from September 2023 Use British English from June 2022 CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 29 January 2024, at 16:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ignace-Gaston Pardies 6 languages Add topic

