Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Causes Toggle Causes subsection 1.1 Founder effect 1.2 Bottleneck effect 1.3 Disruptive selection 2 References Toggle the table of contents Genetic divergence 14 languages Azərbaycanca Български Bosanski Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Português Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Evolutionary process Genetic divergence is the process in which two or more populations of an ancestral species accumulate independent genetic changes ( mutations ) through time, often leading to reproductive isolation and continued mutation even after the populations have become reproductively isolated for some period of time, as there is not any genetic exchange anymore.

[ 1 ] In some cases, subpopulations cover living in ecologically distinct peripheral environments can exhibit genetic divergence from the remainder of a population, especially where the range of a population is very large (see parapatric speciation ). The genetic differences among divergent populations can involve silent mutations (that have no effect on the phenotype ) or give rise to significant morphological and/or physiological changes. Genetic divergence will always accompany reproductive isolation, either due to novel adaptations via selection and/or due to genetic drift , and is the principal mechanism underlying speciation .

On a molecular genetics level, genetic divergence is due to changes in a small number of genes in a species, resulting in speciation .

[ 2 ] However, researchers argue that it is unlikely that divergence is a result of a significant, single, dominant mutation in a genetic locus because if that were so, the individual with that mutation would have zero fitness .

[ 3 ] Consequently, they could not reproduce and pass the mutation on to further generations. Hence, it is more likely that divergence, and subsequently reproductive isolation , are the outcomes of multiple small mutations over evolutionary time accumulating in a  population isolated from gene flow .

[ 2 ] Causes [ edit ] Founder effect [ edit ] One possible cause of genetic divergence is the founder effect , which is when a few individuals become isolated from their original population. Those individuals might overrepresent a certain genetic pattern, which means that certain biological characteristics are overrepresented. These individuals can form a new population with different gene pools from the original population. For example, 10% of the original population has blue eyes and 90% has brown eyes. By chance, 10 individuals are separated from the original population. If this small group has 80% blue eyes and 20% brown eyes, then their offspring would be more likely to have the allele for the blue eyes. As a result, the percentage of the population with blue eyes would be higher than the population with brown eyes, which is different from the original population.

Bottleneck effect [ edit ] Another possible cause of genetic divergence is the bottleneck effect . The bottleneck effect is when an event, such as a natural disaster, causes a large portion of the population to die. By chance, certain genetic patterns will be overrepresented in the remaining population, which is similar to what happens with the founder effect .

[ 4 ] Disruptive selection [ edit ] A graph showing selection for the extremes and against the mean.

Genetic divergence can occur without geographic separation, through Disruptive selection . This occurs when individuals in a population with both high and low phenotypic extremes are fitter than the intermediate phenotype.

[ 5 ] These individuals occupy two different niches, within each niche there is Gaussian trait distribution .

[ 6 ] If the genetic variation between niches is high then there will be strong reproductive isolation.

[ 6 ] If genetic variation is below a certain threshold than introgression will occur but if variation is above a certain threshold the population can split resulting in speciation.

[ 6 ] Disruptive selection is seen in the bimodal population of Darwin's finches , Geospiza fortis .

[ 7 ] The two modes specialize in eating different types of seeds small and soft versus large and hard, this results in beaks of different sizes with different force capacities.

[ 7 ] Individuals with intermediate beak sizes are selected against.

[ 7 ] The song structure and response to song also differs between the two modes.

[ 7 ] There is minimal gene flow between the two modes of G. fortis.

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Reproductive Isolation" .

Understanding Evolution . Berkeley. 16 April 2021.

^ a b Palumbi, Stephen R.

(1994). "Genetic Divergence, Reproductive Isolation, and Marine Speciation".

Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics .

25 : 547– 572.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.25.1.547 .

JSTOR 2097324 .

^ Mayr, Ernst (1942).

Systematics and the Origin of Species . New York: Columbia University Press.

^ Campbell biology . Reece, Jane B., Campbell, Neil A., 1946-2004. (9th ed.). Boston: Benjamin Cummings / Pearson. 2011. pp.

476– 480.

ISBN 978-0-321-55823-7 .

OCLC 624556031 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ Hill, W. G. (2013-01-01), "Disruptive Selection" , in Maloy, Stanley; Hughes, Kelly (eds.), Brenner's Encyclopedia of Genetics (Second Edition) , San Diego: Academic Press, pp.

333– 334, doi : 10.1016/b978-0-12-374984-0.00411-3 , ISBN 978-0-08-096156-9 , retrieved 2020-11-16 ^ a b c Barton, N. H. (2010-06-12).

"What role does natural selection play in speciation?" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

365 (1547): 1825– 1840.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2010.0001 .

ISSN 0962-8436 .

PMC 2871892 .

PMID 20439284 .

^ a b c d e Hendry, Andrew P; Huber, Sarah K; De León, Luis F; Herrel, Anthony; Podos, Jeffrey (2009-02-22).

"Disruptive selection in a bimodal population of Darwin's finches" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

276 (1657): 753– 759.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2008.1321 .

ISSN 0962-8452 .

PMC 2660944 .

PMID 18986971 .

v t e Evolutionary biology Introduction Outline Timeline of evolution History of life Index Evolution Abiogenesis Adaptation Adaptive radiation Altruism Cheating Reciprocal Baldwin effect Cladistics Coevolution Mutualism Common descent Convergence Divergence Earliest known life forms Evidence of evolution Evolutionary arms race Evolutionary pressure Exaptation Extinction Event Homology Last universal common ancestor Macroevolution Microevolution Mismatch Non-adaptive radiation Origin of life Panspermia Parallel evolution Signalling theory Handicap principle Speciation Species Species complex Taxonomy Unit of selection Gene-centered view of evolution Population genetics Artificial selection Biodiversity Evolutionarily stable strategy Fisher's principle Fitness Inclusive Gene flow Genetic drift Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mutation Population Natural selection Sexual dimorphism Sexual selection Flowering plants Fungi Mate choice Social selection Trivers–Willard hypothesis Variation Development Canalisation Evolutionary developmental biology Genetic assimilation Inversion Modularity Phenotypic plasticity Of taxa Bacteria Birds origin Brachiopods Molluscs Cephalopods Dinosaurs Fish Fungi Insects butterflies Life Mammals cats canids wolves dogs hyenas dolphins and whales horses Kangaroos primates humans lemurs sea cows Plants pollinator-mediated Reptiles Spiders Tetrapods Viruses Of organs Cell DNA Flagella Eukaryotes symbiogenesis chromosome endomembrane system mitochondria nucleus plastids In animals eye hair auditory ossicle nervous system brain Of processes Aging Death Programmed cell death Avian flight Biological complexity Cooperation Color vision in primates Emotion Empathy Ethics Eusociality Immune system Metabolism Monogamy Morality Mosaic evolution Multicellularity Sexual reproduction Gamete differentiation/sexes Life cycles/nuclear phases Mating types Meiosis Sex-determination Snake venom Tempo and modes Gradualism / Punctuated equilibrium / Saltationism Micromutation / Macromutation Uniformitarianism / Catastrophism Speciation Allopatric Anagenesis Catagenesis Cladogenesis Cospeciation Ecological Hybrid Non-ecological Parapatric Peripatric Reinforcement Sympatric History Renaissance and Enlightenment Transmutation of species David Hume Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion Charles Darwin On the Origin of Species History of paleontology Transitional fossil Blending inheritance Mendelian inheritance The eclipse of Darwinism Neo-Darwinism Modern synthesis History of molecular evolution Extended evolutionary synthesis Philosophy Darwinism Alternatives Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Saltationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Teleology in biology Related Biogeography Ecological genetics Evolutionary medicine Group selection Cultural evolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Hologenome theory of evolution Missing heritability problem Molecular evolution Astrobiology Phylogenetics Tree Polymorphism Protocell Systematics Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Genetic_divergence&oldid=1301859641 " Categories : Evolutionary biology Population genetics Hidden categories: CS1 maint: others Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 03:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Genetic divergence 14 languages Add topic

