Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works 3 Footnotes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Benito Jerónimo Feijóo y Montenegro 22 languages العربية Asturianu Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Italiano Latina مصرى Nederlands Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spanish monk and scholar (1676–1764) In this Spanish name , the first or paternal surname is Feijóo and the second or maternal family name is Montenegro .

You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Spanish .

(December 2019) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Spanish Wikipedia article at [[:es:Benito Jerónimo Feijoo]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|es|Benito Jerónimo Feijoo}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Benito Jerónimo Feijóo Portrait of Feijóo y Montenegro by Mariano Salvador Maella Born ( 1676-10-08 ) October 8, 1676 Santa María de Melias, near Ourense , Crown of Castile Died September 26, 1764 (1764-09-26) (aged 89) Oviedo , Asturias , Spain Nationality Spanish Occupation(s) Monk, scholar, essayist Friar Benito Jerónimo Feijóo y Montenegro ( Spanish pronunciation: [beˈnito xeˈɾonimo fejˈxo(o) j monteˈneɣɾo] ; 8 October 1676 – 26 September 1764) was a Spanish monk and scholar who led the Age of Enlightenment in Spain.  He was an energetic popularizer noted for encouraging scientific and empirical thought in an effort to debunk myths and superstitions.

Biography [ edit ] He joined the Benedictine order at the age of 12, and had taken classes in Galicia, León , and Salamanca . He later taught theology and philosophy at the University , where he earned a professorship in theology.

He was appalled by the superstition and ignorance of his time, and his works aimed at combating the situation.

[ 1 ] His fame spread quickly throughout Europe. His revelations excited considerable opposition in certain quarters in Spain, for example from Salvador José Mañer and others; but the opposition was futile, and Feijóo's services to the cause of education and knowledge were universally recognized long before his death in Oviedo .

[ 2 ] A century later Alberto Lista said that a monument should be erected to Feijóo, at the foot of which all his works should be burned. He was not a great genius, nor a writer of transcendent merit; his name is connected with no important discovery, but his literary style is clear and not without distinction. He tried to uproot many popular errors, awakened an interest in scientific methods , [ 3 ] and is justly regarded as the initiator of educational reform in Spain.

[ 2 ] Works [ edit ] His two famous works, Teatro crítico universal (1726–1739) and Cartas eruditas y curiosas (1742–1760), are multi-volume collections of essays that cover a range of subjects, from natural history and the then known sciences, education, history, religion, literature, philology, philosophy and medicine, down to superstitions, wonders and salient points of contemporary journalistic interest. In the edition of 1777 they occupy nine and five volumes respectively, to which three supplementary volumes must be added. A reprint occurs in volume 56 of the Biblioteca de autores españoles , with an introduction by Vicente de la Fuente. As learning advanced, his writings were relatively relegated to a place of historical and literary interest. A small portion of his works were translated into English by Captain John Brett (3 vols., 1777-1780).

Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Stanley G. Payne, History of Spain and Portugal (1973) 2:367-71 ^ a b One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Feijóo y Montenegro, Benito Jerónimo ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 10 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

237– 238.

^ "Feijoo and his 'Magisterio de la experiencia' (lessons of experience) – Early Modern Experimental Philosophy, University of Otago, New Zealand" . Blogs.otago.ac.nz. 2012-10-29. Archived from the original on 2014-02-20 . Retrieved 2013-07-24 .

References [ edit ] Rines, George Edwin, ed. (1920).

"Feijóo y Montenegro, Benito Gerónimo" .

Encyclopedia Americana .

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Underhill, John Garrett (1920).

"Cartas of Feijóo" . In Rines, George Edwin (ed.).

Encyclopedia Americana .

v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Sweden Poland 2 Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Benito_Jerónimo_Feijóo_y_Montenegro&oldid=1288725560 " Categories : Age of Enlightenment Writers from Galicia (Spain) 18th-century Spanish people People from Ourense (comarca) Spanish Benedictines Spanish essayists Spanish male writers Academic staff of the University of Oviedo 1676 births 1764 deaths Spanish male essayists University of Salamanca alumni Academic staff of the University of Salamanca Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Biography articles needing translation from Spanish Wikipedia Articles with hCards Pages with Spanish IPA Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from Encyclopedia Americana Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 13:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Benito Jerónimo Feijóo y Montenegro 22 languages Add topic

