Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions Toggle Definitions subsection 1.1 Distinctions from other terms 1.2 In sociology and psychology 1.3 Other forms of the word 2 Origins 3 Historical usage Toggle Historical usage subsection 3.1 Classical Greece 3.2 English language 4 Religion Toggle Religion subsection 4.1 Ancient Greek 4.2 Buddhism 4.3 Christianity 4.4 Islam 4.5 Sikhism 5 Misogynistic ideas among prominent Western thinkers Toggle Misogynistic ideas among prominent Western thinkers subsection 5.1 Aristotle 5.2 Jean-Jacques Rousseau 5.3 Arthur Schopenhauer 5.4 Nietzsche 5.5 Hegel 6 Violence Toggle Violence subsection 6.1 Terrorism and hate crimes 7 Online misogyny Toggle Online misogyny subsection 7.1 Coordinated attacks 7.2 Language used 7.3 Incels 7.4 With white supremacy 8 Psychological impact 9 Feminist theory Toggle Feminist theory subsection 9.1 "Good" versus "bad" women 9.2 Patriarchal bargain 9.3 Contempt for the feminine 10 English and Welsh law 11 See also 12 References 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Misogyny 66 languages Alemannisch العربية অসমীয়া Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kurdî Кыргызча Lietuvių Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Papiamentu Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Betawi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Prejudice against, or hatred of, women "Woman hater" redirects here. For other uses, see Woman Hater (disambiguation) .

Swetnam the Woman-Hater , printed in 1620. The work is credited with originating the English term misogynist .

Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Misogyny ( / m ɪ ˈ s ɒ dʒ ɪ n i / ) is hatred of, contempt for, or prejudice against women or girls . It is a form of sexism that can keep women at a lower social status than men , thus maintaining the social roles of patriarchy . Misogyny has been widely practised for thousands of years. It is reflected in art , literature , human societal structure, historical events, mythology , philosophy , and religion worldwide.

An example of misogyny is violence against women , which includes domestic violence and, in its most extreme forms, misogynist terrorism and femicide . Misogyny also often operates through sexual harassment , coercion, and psychological techniques aimed at controlling women, and by legally or socially excluding women from full citizenship. In some cases, misogyny rewards women for accepting an inferior status.

Misogyny can be understood both as an attitude held by individuals, primarily by men, and as a widespread cultural custom or system. Sometimes misogyny manifests in obvious and bold ways; other times it is more subtle or disguised in ways that provide plausible deniability.

In feminist thought, misogyny is related to femmephobia , the rejection of feminine qualities. It holds in contempt institutions, work, hobbies, or habits associated with women. It rejects any aspects of men that are seen as feminine or unmanly.

[ undue weight?

– discuss ] Racism and other prejudices may reinforce and overlap with misogyny.

The English word misogyny was coined in the middle of the 17th century from the Greek misos 'hatred' + gunē 'woman'.

[ 1 ] The word was rarely used until it was popularised by second-wave feminism in the 1970s.

Definitions English and American dictionaries define misogyny as "hatred of women" [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] and as "hatred, dislike, or mistrust of women".

[ 5 ] In 2012, primarily in response to a speech in the Australian Parliament , [ 6 ] the Macquarie Dictionary (which documents Australian English and New Zealand English ) expanded its definition to include not only hatred of women but also "entrenched prejudices against women".

[ 7 ] Distinctions from other terms The American Merriam-Webster Dictionary distinguishes misogyny, "a hatred of women", from sexism , which denotes sex-based discrimination, and "behavior, conditions, or attitudes that foster stereotypes of social roles based on sex." [ 8 ] Philosopher Kate Manne distinguishes these terms: Patriarchy — a system of power Sexism — a theory justifying that system, and Misogyny — the "enforcement arm" of that system.

Manne defines misogyny as the attempt to control and punish women who challenge male dominance.

[ 9 ] She finds the traditional "hatred of women" definition of misogyny too simplistic, noting it does not account for how perpetrators of misogynistic violence may love certain women; for example, their mothers.

[ 10 ] : 52 Instead, misogyny rewards women who uphold the status quo and punishes those who reject women's subordinate status.

[ 9 ] Manne distinguishes sexism , which she says seeks to rationalise and justify patriarchy , from misogyny, which she calls the "law enforcement" branch of patriarchy: [S]exist ideology will tend to discriminate between men and women, typically by alleging sex differences beyond what is known or could be known, and sometimes counter to our best current scientific evidence. Misogyny will typically differentiate between good women and bad ones, and punishes the latter. […] Sexism wears a lab coat; misogyny goes on witch hunts .

[ 10 ] : 79 Femininity researcher Rhea Ashley Hoskin dinstinguishes between oppression based on female gender, and oppression based on feminine gender expression . The academic term for the latter is femmephobia .

[ 11 ] In sociology and psychology Social psychology research [ vague ] describes overt misogyny as "blatant hostile sexism" that raises resistance in women, as opposed to "manifestations of benevolent sexism" or chivalry that lead women to behave in a manner perpetuating patriarchal arrangements.

[ 12 ] According to sociologist Allan G. Johnson , "misogyny is a cultural attitude of hatred for females because they are female". Johnson argues that: Misogyny .... is a central part of sexist prejudice and ideology and, as such, is an important basis for the oppression of females in male-dominated societies. Misogyny is manifested in many different ways, from jokes to pornography to violence to the self-contempt women may be taught to feel toward their own bodies.

[ 13 ] Sociologist Michael Flood at the University of Wollongong defines misogyny as the hatred of women, and notes: Though most common in men, misogyny also exists in and is practiced by women against other women or even themselves. Misogyny functions as an ideology or belief system that has accompanied patriarchal, or male-dominated societies for thousands of years and continues to place women in subordinate positions with limited access to power and decision making. […] Aristotle contended that women exist as natural deformities or imperfect males […] Ever since, women in Western cultures have internalised their role as societal scapegoats, influenced in the twenty-first century by multimedia objectification of women with its culturally sanctioned self-loathing and fixations on plastic surgery , anorexia and bulimia .

[ 14 ] Other forms of the word Misogynous and misogynistic can both be used as an adjectival form of the word.

[ 15 ] The noun misogynist can be used for a woman-hating person. The counterpart of misogyny is misandry , the hatred or dislike of men. Marc A. Ouellette argues in International Encyclopedia of Men and Masculinities that "misandry lacks the systemic, transhistoric, institutionalized, and legislated antipathy of misogyny".

[ 16 ] Anthropologist David Gilmore argues that misogyny is a "near-universal phenomenon" and that there is no male equivalent.

[ 17 ] The antonym of misogyny, philogyny —love or fondness toward women— [ 18 ] is not widely used.  Words derived from the word misogyny and denoting connected concepts include misogynoir , the intersection of anti-black racism and misogyny faced by Black women; transmisogyny , the intersection of misogyny and transphobia faced by trans women and transfeminine people; and transmisogynoir, the confluence of these faced by black trans women and transfeminine people.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Origins Misogyny likely arose at the same time as patriarchy : three to five thousand years ago at the start of the Bronze Age . The three main monotheistic religions of Judaism , Christianity and Islam promoted patriarchal societal structures, and used misogyny to keep women at a lower status.

[ 21 ] [ 10 ] Misogyny gained strength in the Middle Ages , especially in Christian societies.

[ 22 ] In parallel to these, misogyny was also practised in societies such as the Romans, Greeks, and the tribes of the Amazon Basin and Melanesia , who did not follow a monotheistic religion. Nearly every human culture contains evidence of misogyny.

[ 23 ] Anthropologist David D. Gilmore argues that misogyny is rooted in men's conflicting feelings: men's existential dependence on women for procreation , and men's fear of women's power over them in their times of male weakness, contrasted against the deep-seated needs of men for the love, care and comfort of women—a need that makes the men feel vulnerable.

[ 24 ] Angela Saini notes that a large proportion of women in ancient societies were kidnapped brides from other cultures. Such a woman was often forced to marry a man who had killed her family. Misogynistic suspicion in ancient Greece and elsewhere is to some degree explained by male anxiety that women would some day revolt against their captors.

[ 25 ] : 139 Saini argues that patriarchy and gender stereotyping emerged at the same time as the state .

[ 25 ] : 118–119 Historical usage Classical Greece Roman copy of a Hellenistic bust of Chrysippus ( British Museum ) In his book City of Sokrates: An Introduction to Classical Athens , J.W. Roberts argues that older than tragedy and comedy was a misogynistic tradition in Greek literature, reaching back at least as far as Hesiod .

[ 26 ] He claims that the term misogyny itself comes directly into English from the Ancient Greek word misogunia ( μισογυνία ), which survives in several passages.

The earlier, longer, and more complete passage comes from a moral tract known as On Marriage ( c . 150 BC) by the stoic philosopher Antipater of Tarsus .

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] pp. 221–226.

Misogunia appears in the accusative case on page 224 of Deming, as the fifth word in line 33 of his Greek text.
It is split over lines 25–26 in von Arnim.  Antipater argues that marriage is the foundation of the state, and considers it to be based on divine ( polytheistic ) decree. He uses misogunia to describe the sort of writing the tragedian Euripides eschews, stating that he "reject[s] the hatred of women in his writing" (ἀποθέμενος τὴν ἐν τῷ γράφειν μισογυνίαν).  He then offers an example of this, quoting from a lost play of Euripides in which the merits of a dutiful wife are praised.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] According to Tieleman other surviving use of the Ancient Greek word is by Chrysippus , in a fragment from On affections , quoted by Galen in Hippocrates on Affections .

[ 30 ] Here, misogyny is the first in a short list of three "disaffections"—women ( misogunia ), wine ( misoinia , μισοινία) and humanity ( misanthrōpia , μισανθρωπία). Chrysippus' point is more abstract than Antipater's, and Galen quotes the passage as an example of an opinion contrary to his own. What is clear, however, is that he groups hatred of women with hatred of humanity generally, and even hatred of wine. "It was the prevailing medical opinion of his day that wine strengthens body and soul alike." [ 31 ] So Chrysippus, like his fellow stoic Antipater, views misogyny negatively, as a disease ; a dislike of something that is good. It is this issue of conflicted or alternating emotions that was philosophically contentious to the ancient writers. Ricardo Salles suggests that the general stoic view was that "[a] man may not only alternate between philogyny and misogyny, philanthropy and misanthropy, but be prompted to each by the other." [ 32 ] In the Routledge philosophy guidebook to Plato and the Republic , Nickolas Pappas describes the "problem of misogyny" and states: In the Apology , Socrates calls those who plead for their lives in court "no better than women" (35b)... The Timaeus warns men that if they live immorally they will be reincarnated as women (42b-c; cf. 75d-e). The Republic contains a number of comments in the same spirit (387e, 395d-e, 398e, 431b-c, 469d), evidence of nothing so much as of contempt toward women. Even Socrates' words for his bold new proposal about marriage... suggest that the women are to be "held in common" by men. He never says that the men might be held in common by the women... We also have to acknowledge Socrates' insistence that men surpass women at any task that both sexes attempt (455c, 456a), and his remark in Book 8 that one sign of democracy's moral failure is the sexual equality it promotes (563b).

[ 33 ] Misogynist is also found in the Greek— misogunēs ( μισογύνης )—in Deipnosophistae and in Plutarch 's Parallel Lives , where it is used as the title of Heracles in the history of Phocion . It was the title of a play by Menander , which we know of from book seven (concerning Alexandria ) of Strabo 's 17 volume Geography , [ 34 ] [ 35 ] and quotations of Menander by Clement of Alexandria and Stobaeus that relate to marriage.

[ 36 ] A Greek play with a similar name, Misogunos (Μισόγυνος) or Woman-hater , is reported by Marcus Tullius Cicero (in Latin) and attributed to the poet Marcus Atilius .

[ 37 ] Marcus Tullius Cicero Cicero reports that Greek philosophers considered misogyny to be caused by gynophobia , a fear of women.

[ 38 ] It is the same with other diseases; as the desire of glory, a passion for women, to which the Greeks give the name of philogyneia : and thus all other diseases and sicknesses are generated. But those feelings which are the contrary of these are supposed to have fear for their foundation, as a hatred of women, such as is displayed in the Woman-hater of Atilius; or the hatred of the whole human species, as Timon is reported to have done, whom they call the Misanthrope. Of the same kind is inhospitality. And all these diseases proceed from a certain dread of such things as they hate and avoid.

[ 38 ] — Cicero, Tusculanae Quaestiones , 1st century BC.

In summary, despite considering women as generally inferior to men, Greek literature considered misogyny to be a disease —an anti-social condition—in that it ran contrary to their perceptions of the value of women as wives and of the family as the foundation of society. These points are widely noted in the secondary literature.

[ 28 ] English language Julia Gillard According to the Oxford English Dictionary , the word entered English because of an anonymous proto-feminist play, Swetnam the Woman-Hater , published in 1620 in England.

[ 39 ] The play is a criticism of anti-woman writer Joseph Swetnam , who it represents with the pseudonym Misogynos. The character of Misogynos is the origin of the term misogynist in English.

[ 40 ] The term was fairly rare until the mid-1970s. The publication of feminist Andrea Dworkin 's 1974 critique Woman Hating popularised the idea. The term misogyny entered the lexicon of second-wave feminism . Dworkin and her contemporaries used the term to include not only a hatred or contempt of women, but the practice of controlling women with violence and punishing women who reject subordination.

[ 40 ] Misogyny was discussed worldwide in 2012 because of a viral video of a speech by Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard . Her parliamentary address is known as the Misogyny Speech . In the speech, Gillard powerfully criticised her opponents for holding her policies to a different standard than those of male politicians, and for speaking about her in crudely sexual terms.

[ 41 ] She was criticised for systemic misogyny, because earlier in the day her Labour Party had passed legislation cutting $728 million in welfare benefits to single mothers.

[ 42 ] Gillard's usage of the word "misogyny" promoted re-evaluations of the word's published definitions. The Macquarie Dictionary revised its definition in 2012 to better match the way the word has been used over the prior 30 years.

[ 43 ] The book Down Girl , which reconsidered the definition using the tools of analytic philosophy , was inspired in part by Gillard.

[ 10 ] : 83 Religion See also: Feminist theology and Gender and religion Ancient Greek Pandora by John William Waterhouse , 1896 In Misogyny: The World's Oldest Prejudice , Jack Holland argues that there is evidence of misogyny in the mythology of the ancient world. In Greek mythology according to Hesiod, the human race had already experienced a peaceful, autonomous existence as a companion to the gods before the creation of women. When Prometheus decides to steal the secret of fire from the gods, Zeus becomes infuriated and decides to punish humankind with an "evil thing for their delight". This "evil thing" is Pandora , the first woman, who carried a jar (usually described—incorrectly—as a box) which she was told to never open. Pandora cannot resist peeking into the jar, and by opening it she unleashes into the world all evil; labour , sickness , old age , and death .

[ 44 ] Buddhism Main article: Women in Buddhism In his book The Power of Denial: Buddhism, Purity, and Gender , professor Bernard Faure of Columbia University argued that "Buddhism is paradoxically neither as sexist nor as egalitarian as is usually thought." He remarked, "Many feminist scholars have emphasised the misogynistic (or at least androcentric) nature of Buddhism" and stated that Buddhism morally exalts its male monks while the mothers and wives of the monks also have important roles. Additionally, he wrote: While some scholars see Buddhism as part of a movement of emancipation, others see it as a source of oppression. Perhaps this is only a distinction between optimists and pessimists, if not between idealists and realists... As we begin to realise, the term "Buddhism" does not designate a monolithic entity, but covers a number of doctrines, ideologies, and practices--some of which seem to invite, tolerate, and even cultivate "otherness" on their margins.

[ 45 ] Christianity Main article: Women in Christianity See also: Complementarianism , Christian egalitarianism , and 1 Timothy 2:12 Eve rides astride the Serpent on a capital in Laach Abbey church , 13th century.

Personification of the seven deadly sins, Mediaeval Differences in tradition and interpretations of scripture have caused sects of Christianity to differ in their beliefs with regard to their treatment of women.

In The Troublesome Helpmate , Katharine M. Rogers argues that Christianity is misogynistic, and she lists what she says are specific examples of misogyny in the Pauline epistles . She states: "The foundations of early Christian misogyny—its guilt about sex, its insistence on female subjection, its dread of female seduction—are all in St. Paul's epistles." [ 46 ] In K. K. Ruthven's Feminist Literary Studies: An Introduction , Ruthven makes reference to Rogers' book and argues that the "legacy of Christian misogyny was consolidated by the so-called 'Fathers' of the Church, like Tertullian , who thought a woman was not only 'the gateway of the devil' but also 'a temple built over a sewer'." [ 47 ] Several Christian institutions exclude women. For example, women are excluded from the Mount Athos region of Greece and from the governing hierarchy of the Catholic Church . Some Christian theologians, such as John Knox in his book The First Blast of the Trumpet Against the Monstruous Regiment of Women , have written that women should be excluded from secular government institutions for religious reasons.

However, some other scholars have argued that Christianity does not include misogynistic principles, or at least that a proper interpretation of Christianity would not include misogynistic principles. David M. Scholer, a biblical scholar at Fuller Theological Seminary , stated that the verse Galatians 3:28 ("There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is neither male nor female; for you are all one in Christ Jesus") is "the fundamental Pauline theological basis for the inclusion of women and men as equal and mutual partners in all of the ministries of the church." [ 48 ] [ 49 ] In Christian Men Who Hate Women , clinical psychologist Margaret J. Rinck has written that Christian social culture often allows a misogynist "misuse of the biblical ideal of submission". However, she argues that this a distortion of the "healthy relationship of mutual submission" which is actually specified in Christian doctrine, where "[l]ove is based on a deep, mutual respect as the guiding principle behind all decisions, actions, and plans".

[ 50 ] Similarly, Catholic scholar Christopher West argues that "male domination violates God's plan and is the specific result of sin".

[ 51 ] Islam Main article: Women in Islam See also: Namus and Islam and domestic violence The fourth chapter (or sura ) of the Quran is called "Women" ( an-nisa ). The 34th verse is a key verse in feminist criticism of Islam .

[ 52 ] The verse notes men's God-given advantages over women. They are consequently their protectors and maintainers. Where women are disobedient "admonish them, and leave them alone in the sleeping-places and beat them; then if they obey you, do not seek a way against them..." In his book No god but God , University of Southern California , Professor Reza Aslan wrote that "misogynistic interpretation" has been persistently attached to An-Nisa, 34 because commentary on the Quran "has been the exclusive domain of Muslim men".

[ 53 ] In his book Popular Islam and Misogyny: A Case Study of Bangladesh , Taj Hashmi discusses misogyny in relation to Muslim culture, writing: [T]hanks to the subjective interpretations of the Quran (almost exclusively by men), the preponderance of the misogynic mullahs and the regressive Shariah law in most "Muslim" countries, Islam is synonymously known as a promoter of misogyny in its worst form.... we may draw a line between the Quranic texts and the corpus of avowedly misogynic writing and spoken words by the mullah having very little or no relevance to the Quran.

[ 54 ] The economic and social position of men and women was reflected in blood money to the family of a victim. The financial loss for a woman was pegged at half that of a man.

[ 55 ] Sikhism See also: Women in Sikhism Scholars William M. Reynolds and Julie A. Webber have written that Guru Nanak , the founder of the Sikh faith tradition, was a "fighter for women's rights" that was "in no way misogynistic" in contrast to some of his contemporaries.

[ 56 ] However, unconscious misogynistic attitudes in Sikh men have steadily reduced the power of women in Sikhism, such that the Sikh community has been observed to contain toxic masculinity .

[ 57 ] Misogynistic ideas among prominent Western thinkers Numerous influential Western philosophers have expressed ideas that have been characterised as misogynistic, including Aristotle , René Descartes , Thomas Hobbes , John Locke , David Hume , Jean-Jacques Rousseau , G. W. F. Hegel , Arthur Schopenhauer , Friedrich Nietzsche , Sigmund Freud , Otto Weininger , Oswald Spengler , and John Lucas .

[ 58 ] Because of the influence of these thinkers, feminist scholars trace misogyny in Western culture to these philosophers and their ideas.

[ 59 ] Aristotle Portrait of Aristotle, copy of Lysippos , Louvre Main article: Aristotle's views on women Aristotle believed women were inferior and described them as "deformed males".

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] In his work Politics , he states as regards the sexes, the male is by nature superior and the female inferior, the male ruler and the female subject 4 (1254b13-14).

[ 61 ] Another example is Cynthia's catalog in which Cynthia states "Aristotle says that the courage of a man lies in commanding, a woman's lies in obeying; that 'matter yearns for form, as the female for the male and the ugly for the beautiful'; that women have fewer teeth than men; that a female is an incomplete male or 'as it were, a deformity'.

[ 60 ] Aristotle believed that men and women naturally differed both physically and mentally. He claimed that women are "more mischievous, less simple, more impulsive ... more compassionate[,] ... more easily moved to tears[,] ... more jealous, more querulous, more apt to scold and to strike[,] ... more prone to despondency and less hopeful[,] ... more void of shame or self-respect, more false of speech, more deceptive, of more retentive memory [and] ... also more wakeful; more shrinking [and] more difficult to rouse to action" than men.

[ 62 ] Jean-Jacques Rousseau Jean-Jacques Rousseau is well known for his views against equal rights for women for example in his treatise Emile , he writes: Always justify the burdens you impose upon girls but impose them anyway... . They must be thwarted from an early age... . They must be exercised to constraint, so that it costs them nothing to stifle all their fantasies to submit them to the will of others." Other quotes consist of "closed up in their houses", "must receive the decisions of fathers and husbands like that of the church.

[ 63 ] Arthur Schopenhauer Schopenhauer by Karl Bauer Based on his essay "On Women" (Über die Weiber), Arthur Schopenhauer has been noted as a misogynist by many such as the philosopher, critic, and author Tom Grimwood.

[ 64 ] In a 2008 article published in the philosophical journal of Kritique, Grimwood argues that Schopenhauer's misogynistic works have largely escaped attention despite being more noticeable than those of other philosophers such as Nietzsche.

[ 64 ] For example, he noted Schopenhauer's works where the latter had argued women only have "meagre" reason comparable that of "the animal" "who lives in the present". Other works he noted consisted of Schopenhauer's argument that women's only role in nature is to further the species through childbirth and hence is equipped with the power to seduce and "capture" men.

[ 64 ] He goes on to state that women's cheerfulness is chaotic and disruptive which is why it is crucial to exercise obedience to those with rationality. For her to function beyond her rational subjugator is a threat against men as well as other women, he notes. Schopenhauer also thought women's cheerfulness is an expression of her lack of morality and incapability to understand abstract or objective meaning such as art.

[ 64 ] This is followed up by his quote "have never been able to produce a single, really great, genuine and original achievement in the fine arts, or bring to anywhere into the world a work of permanent value".

[ 64 ] Schopenhauer condemned what he called "Teutonico-Christian stupidity" on female affairs. He argued that women are "by nature meant to obey" as they are "childish, frivolous, and short sighted".

[ 58 ] He also argued that women did not possess any real beauty: [ 65 ] It is only a man whose intellect is clouded by his sexual impulse that could give the name of the fair sex to that under-sized, narrow-shouldered, broad-hipped, and short-legged race; for the whole beauty of the sex is bound up with this impulse. Instead of calling them beautiful there would be more warrant for describing women as the unaesthetic sex.

Nietzsche Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche Main article: Friedrich Nietzsche's views on women In Beyond Good and Evil , Friedrich Nietzsche stated that stricter controls on women was a condition of "every elevation of culture".

[ 66 ] In his Thus Spoke Zarathustra , he has a female character say "You are going to women? Do not forget the whip!" [ 67 ] In Twilight of the Idols , Nietzsche writes "Women are considered profound. Why? Because we never fathom their depths. But women aren't even shallow." [ 68 ] There is controversy over the questions of whether or not this amounts to misogyny, whether his polemic against women is meant to be taken literally, and the exact nature of his opinions of women.

[ 69 ] Hegel Hegel's view of women has been characterised as misogynistic.

[ 70 ] Passages from Hegel's Elements of the Philosophy of Right illustrate the criticism: [ 71 ] Women are capable of education, but they are not made for activities which demand a universal faculty such as the more advanced sciences, philosophy and certain forms of artistic production... Women regulate their actions not by the demands of universality, but by arbitrary inclinations and opinions.

Violence Terrorism and hate crimes Femicide is the name of a hate crime , the intentional killing of women or girls on account of their sex. It is ideological misogynist killing, and in some cases may also be an example of domestic violence.

[ 72 ] Misogynist terrorism is terrorism intended to punish woman. Since 2018 counter-terrorism professionals such as ICCT and START have tracked misogyny or male supremacy as ideologies that have motivated terrorism. They describe this form of terror as a "rising threat". Among the attacks designated as misogynist terrorism are the 2014 Isla Vista killings and the 2018 Toronto van attack .

[ 73 ] Some of the attackers have identified with the incel movement, and were motivated to kill by a perception of being entitled to sexual access to women.

[ 73 ] However, misogyny is common among mass killers, even when it is not the primary motivation.

[ 74 ] Online misogyny See also: Cyberbullying Misogynistic rhetoric is pervasive online and has grown more aggressive over time.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Online misogyny includes both individual attempts to intimidate and denigrate women, [ 75 ] denial of gender inequity ( neosexism ), [ 77 ] [ 78 ] and also coordinated, collective attempts such as vote brigading and the Gamergate antifeminist harassment campaign.

[ 79 ] In a paper written for the Journal of International Affairs , Kim Barker and Olga Jurasz discuss how online misogyny can lead to women facing obstacles when trying to engage in the public and political spheres of the Internet due to the abusive nature of these spaces. They also suggest regulations and shut downs of online misogyny through both governmental and non-governmental means.

[ 80 ] Coordinated attacks Anita Sarkeesian was the target of a coordinated misogynistic attack because of her feminist work.

The most likely targets for misogynistic attacks by coordinated groups are women who are visible in the public sphere, women who speak out about the threats they receive, and women who are perceived to be associated with feminism or feminist gains. Authors of misogynistic messages are usually anonymous or otherwise difficult to identify. Their rhetoric involves misogynistic epithets and graphic or sexualised imagery. It centres on the women's physical appearance, and prescribes sexual violence as a corrective for the targeted women. Examples of people who spoke out about misogynistic attacks are Anita Sarkeesian , Laurie Penny , Caroline Criado Perez , Stella Creasy , and Lindy West .

[ 75 ] These attacks do not always remain online only.

Swatting was used to bring Gamergate attacks into the physical world.

[ 81 ] Language used The insults and threats directed at different women tend to be very similar.

Jude Doyle , who has been the target of online threats, noted the "overwhelmingly impersonal, repetitive, stereotyped quality" of the abuse, the fact that "all of us are being called the same things, in the same tone".

[ 75 ] A 2016 study conducted by the think tank Demos found that the majority of Twitter messages containing the words "whore" or "slut" were advertisements for pornography. Of those that were not, a majority used the terms in a non-aggressive way, such a discussion of slut-shaming . Of those that used the terms "whore" or "slut" in an aggressive, insulting way, about half were women and half were men. Twitter users most frequently targeted by women with aggressive insults were celebrities, such as Beyoncé Knowles .

[ 82 ] A 2020 study published in the journal New Media & Society also discusses how language on the internet can contribute to online misogyny. The authors specifically criticise Urban Dictionary , claiming the language used in the definitions are misogynistic and anti-feminist, rather than simply being a collaborative dictionary.

[ 83 ] A 2021 study published at the meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics notes that online misogyny presents differently in different contexts. For example: Spanish online discussions show a stronger presence of dominance; Italian misogyny has a plurality of stereotyping and objectification; English online misogyny most frequently involves discrediting women; and Danish discussions primarily express neo-sexism.

[ 77 ] Incels Main article: Incel Incels, or involuntary celibates, is an online community of men who believe they cannot get into heterosexual relationships. They share a common belief that women pick partners based solely on looks, so due to their unattractiveness, they will be alone forever.

[ 84 ] Due to this perception of themselves, incels in turn hate women, and believe that men are systematically discriminated against. Incels have a large network of male-oriented websites dedicated to the cyber hate of women, discrimination, and networking of misogyny.

[ 85 ] In the incel form of misogyny, all women are discriminated against, however, women of colour are doubly denigrated by sexism and racism. Incels endorse and participate in sexism, racism, and mass violence.

[ 86 ] They are not only a threat in online communities, but they also carry their misogyny over to killing sprees, like the 2014 Isla Vista massacre that inspired other incel acts of violence.

[ 87 ] Incel existence and rhetoric is a good example of misogyny online.

With white supremacy Andrew Anglin uses the white supremacist website The Daily Stormer as a platform to promote misogynistic conspiracy theories, claiming that politically active "[w]hite women across the Western world" are pushing for liberal immigration policies "to ensure an endless supply of Black and Arab men to satisfy their depraved sexual desires." [ 88 ] In July 2018, Anglin summarised his misogynistic views, writing: "Look, I hate women. I think they deserve to be beaten, raped and locked in cages." [ 89 ] The term misogynoir describes misogyny directed towards Black women where prejudice based upon race and gender play reinforcing roles .

Psychological impact Main article: Internalised sexism Women who experience internalised misogyny may express it through minimising the value of women, mistrusting women, and believing gender bias in favour of men.

[ 90 ] A common manifestation of internalised misogyny is lateral violence .
Misogyny has taken shape as sexual harassment .

[ 91 ] Misogynist attitudes lead to the physical, sexual, and emotional abuse of gender nonconforming boys in childhood.

[ 92 ] Feminist theory "Good" versus "bad" women Many feminists have written that the notions of "good" women and "bad" women are imposed upon women in order to control them. Women who are easy to control, or who advocate for their own oppression, may be told they are good. The categories of bad and good also cause fighting among women; Helen Lewis identifies this "long tradition of regulating female behaviour by defining women in opposition to one another" as the architecture of misogyny.

[ 93 ] Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie The Madonna–whore dichotomy or virgin/whore dichotomy is the perception of women as either good and chaste or as bad and promiscuous. Belief in this dichotomy leads to misogyny, according to the feminist perspective, because the dichotomy appears to justify policing women's behaviour. Misogynists seek to punish "bad" women for their sexuality.

[ 12 ] Author Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie observes that when women describe being harassed or assaulted (as in the #MeToo movement ) they are viewed as deserving sympathy only if they are "good" women: non-sexual, and perhaps helpless.

[ 94 ] In her 1974 book Woman Hating , Andrea Dworkin uses traditional fairy tales to illustrate misogyny. Fairy tales designate certain women as "good", for example Sleeping Beauty and Snow White , who are inert, passive characters. Dworkin observed that these characters "never think, act, initiate, confront, resist, challenge, feel, care, or question. Sometimes they are forced to do housework." In contrast, the "evil" women who populate fairy tales are queens, witches, and other women with power. Further, men in fairy tales are said to be good kings and good husbands irrespective of their actions. For Dworkin, this illustrates that under misogyny only powerless women are allowed to be seen as good. No similar judgement is applied to men.

[ 95 ] Andrea Dworkin In her book Right-Wing Women , Dworkin adds that powerful women are tolerated by misogynists provided women use their power to reinforce the power of men and to oppose feminism. Dworkin gives Phyllis Schlafly and Anita Bryant as examples of powerful women tolerated by anti-feminists only because they advocated for their own oppression. Women may even be worshipped or called superior to men if they are sufficiently "good", meaning obedient or inert.

[ 96 ] Philosopher Kate Manne argues that the word "misogyny" as used by modern feminists denotes not a generalised hatred of women, but instead the system of distinguishing good from bad women. Misogyny is like a police force, Manne writes, that rewards or punishes women based on these judgements.

[ 10 ] : 79 Patriarchal bargain In the late 20th century, second-wave feminist theorists argued that misogyny is both a cause and a result of patriarchal social structures .

[ 97 ] Economist Deniz Kandiyoti has written that colonisers of the Middle East, Africa, and Asia kept conquered armies of men under control by offering them complete power over women. She calls this the "patriarchal bargain". Men who were interested in accepting the bargain were promoted to leadership by colonial powers, causing the colonised societies to become more misogynistic.

[ 98 ] Contempt for the feminine Julia Serano defines misogyny as not only hatred of women per se, but the "tendency to dismiss and deride femaleness and femininity." In this view, misogyny also causes homophobia against gay men because gay men are stereotyped as feminine and weak; misogyny likewise causes anxiety among straight men that they will be seen as unmanly.

[ 99 ] Serano's book Whipping Girl argues that most anti-trans sentiment directed at trans women should be understood as misogyny. By embracing femininity, the book argues, trans women cast doubt on the superiority of masculinity.

[ 100 ] Jean-Léon Gérôme , Pygmalion and Galatea , c. 1890 Culture rewards traits that are considered masculine and devalues traits that seem feminine, according to Tracy M. Hallstead at Quinnipiac University . From childhood, boys and men are told to "man up" to appear tough by distancing themselves from feminine things. Boys learn that it is shameful to be seen as emotional, dependent, or vulnerable. Men raised in this way may disown femininity and may even learn to despise it. In this view, misogyny is directed not only at women, but at any feminine qualities that men see within themselves.

[ 101 ] This contempt for the feminine causes men feel that they must assert their dominance over women by controlling them, Hallstead writes. She illustrates this with the ancient story of Pygmalion , a sculptor who hated "the faults beyond measure which nature has given to women." [ 102 ] Pygmalion creates a sculpture of a woman that magically comes alive. Pygmalion is very gratified by the complete control he has over the woman, Galatea , because this control re-enforces his masculinity. He considers Galatea the perfect woman, in spite of his contempt for women, because of his absolute power over her.

[ 101 ] English and Welsh law In recent years, there has been increasing discussion in England and Wales of misogyny being added to the list of aggravating factors that are commonly referred to by the media as " hate crimes ". Aggravating factors in criminal sentencing currently include hostility to a victim due to characteristics such as sexuality, race or disability.

[ 103 ] In 2016, Nottinghamshire Police began a pilot project to record misogynistic behaviour as either hate crime or hate incidents, depending on whether the action was a criminal offence.

[ 104 ] Over two years (April 2016-March 2018) there were 174 reports made, of which 73 were classified as crimes and 101 as incidents.

[ 105 ] In September 2018, it was announced that the Law Commission would conduct a review into whether misogynistic conduct, as well as hostility due to ageism , misandry or towards groups such as goths , should be treated as a hate crime.

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] In October 2018, two senior police officers, Sara Thornton , chair of the National Police Chiefs' Council, and Cressida Dick , Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police, stated that police forces should focus on more serious crimes such as burglary and violent offences, and not on recording incidents which are not crimes.

[ 108 ] Thornton said that "treating misogyny as a hate crime is a concern for some well-organised campaigning organisations", but that police forces "do not have the resources to do everything".

[ 109 ] In September 2020 the Law Commission proposed that sex or gender be added to the list of protected characteristics.

[ 110 ] At the time of the Law Commission's proposals seven police forces in England and Wales classed misogyny as a hate crime, but that definition had not been adopted across the board.

[ 111 ] A Home Office spokesperson in October 2021 stated that police forces had been requested to record any crime the victim understood was driven by hostility to their sex.

[ 112 ] See also Androcentrism Exploitation of women in mass media Gender in horror films Gender studies Misogyny and mass media Misogyny in rap music Misogyny in sports Male chauvinism Women's rights References ^ "Meaning of misogyny in English" .

Lexico . Dictionary.com; Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 26 February 2020.

^ Brown, L. (1 January 1993).

The New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary on Historical Principles. Two Volumes Complete . Oxford University Press.

^ Company, H. M. (26 June 2012).

The American Heritage Dictionary (Fifth ed.). Dell.

^ Gove, P. B., ed. (1 January 1993).

Webster's Third New International Dictionary, Unabridged . Merriam-Webster, Inc.

ISBN 978-0-87779-201-7 .

^ Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary . Random House. 7 October 1997.

ISBN 978-0-679-45854-8 .

^ "Transcript of Julia Gillard's speech" .

The Sydney Morning Herald .

Archived from the original on 6 November 2016 . Retrieved 15 November 2016 .

^ Daley, Gemma (17 October 2012).

"Macquarie Dictionary has last word on misogyny" . Archived from the original on 19 October 2012.

^ "Definition of MISOGYNY" . 11 August 2023.

Archived from the original on 17 January 2019 . Retrieved 12 October 2021 .

^ a b Illing, Sean (7 March 2020).

"What we get wrong about misogyny" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on 9 June 2023 . Retrieved 16 July 2020 .

^ a b c d e Manne, Kate (2019).

Down Girl: The Logic of Misogyny . Ithaca, New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-060498-1 .

^ Hoskin, Rhea Ashley; Serafini, Toni; Gillespie, Julia G. (2023).

"Femmephobia versus gender norms: Examining women's responses to competing and contradictory gender messages" .

The Canadian Journal of Human Sexuality .

32 (2): 191– 207.

doi : 10.3138/cjhs.2023-0017 .

ISSN 2291-7063 .

^ a b Kahalon, Rotem; Bareket, Orly; Vial, Andrea C.; Sassenhagen, Nora; Becker, Julia C.; Shnabel, Nurit (2 May 2019). "The Madonna-Whore Dichotomy Is Associated With Patriarchy Endorsement: Evidence From Israel, the United States, and Germany".

Psychology of Women Quarterly .

43 (3): 348– 367.

doi : 10.1177/0361684319843298 .

S2CID 155434624 .

^ Johnson, Allan G (2000).

The Blackwell dictionary of sociology: A user's guide to sociological language . Wiley.

ISBN 978-0-631-21681-0 .

, ("ideology" in all small capitals in original).

^ Flood, Michael (18 July 2007).

International encyclopaedia of men and masculinities . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-33343-6 .

^ "Definition of "misogyny" " .

Dictionary.com .

Archived from the original on 25 October 2018 . Retrieved 4 November 2018 .

^ Ouellette, Marc (2007). "Misandry". In Flood, Michael ; et al. (eds.).

International Encyclopedia of Men and Masculinities . Routledge. pp.

442– 443.

ISBN 978-1-1343-1707-3 .

^ Gilmore, David G. (2001).

Misogyny: The Male Malady . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. pp.

10– 13.

ISBN 978-0-8122-0032-4 .

^ Groes-Green, Christian (2011). "Philogynous Masculinities: Contextualising Alternative Manhood in Mozambique".

Men and Masculinities .

15 (2): 91– 111.

doi : 10.1177/1097184x11427021 .

S2CID 145337308 .

^ Nadal, Kevin L., ed. (2017). "Transmisogyny".

The SAGE Encyclopedia of Psychology and Gender .

^ Reger, Jo, ed. (2018).

Nevertheless, They Persisted: Feminisms and Continued Resistance in the U.S. Women's Movement . Taylor & Francis.

Julia Serano [...] coined the term 'trans misogyny' to refer to specific discrimination against trans women and trans people who express femininity. [...] 'transmisogynoir' [can] focus on the violence and discrimination experienced by black and potentially other trans women and trans feminine people of color. This concept builds on Moya Bailey's term 'misogynoir,' which specifically names the intersection of 'racism, antiblackness, and misogyny that black women experience'[.] ^ Mohl, Allan S. (Summer 2015).

"Monotheism: Its Influence on Patriarchy and Misogyny" .

Journal of Psychohistory .

43 (1): 1– 20.

Archived from the original on 27 October 2021 . Retrieved 13 October 2021 .

^ Bloch, R. Howard; Ferguson, Frances (1989).

Misogyny, Misandry, and Misanthropy . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-06544-4 .

^ Gilmore (2001) , pp. 17–35.

^ Gilmore (2001) , pp. 1–16.

^ a b Saini, Angela (2023).

The Patriarchs: The Origins of Inequality . Boston: Beacon Press.

ISBN 978-0-8070-1454-7 .

^ Roberts, J.W (1 June 2002).

City of Sokrates: An Introduction to Classical Athens . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-203-19479-9 .

^ The editio princeps is on page 255 of volume three of Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta ( SVF , Old Stoic Fragments), see External links .

^ a b c Deming, Will (2004). "Appendix A".

Paul on Marriage and Celibacy: The Hellenistic Background of 1 Corinthians 7 . Grand Rapids, Mich.: William B. Eerdmans Publishing. pp.

221– 226.

ISBN 978-0-8028-3989-3 .

^ 38-43, fr. 63, in von Arnim, J. (ed.).

Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta.

Vol. 3. Leipzig: Teubner, 1903.

^ SVF 3:103.

Misogyny is the first word on the page.

^ Tieleman, Teun (2003).

Chrysippus' On Affections: Reconstruction and Interpretations . Leiden, Netherlands: Brill. p. 162.

ISBN 978-90-04-12998-6 .

^ Ricardo Salles, Metaphysics, Soul, and Ethics in Ancient Thought: Themes from the Work of Richard Sorabji , (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2005), 485.

^ Pappas, Nickolas (9 September 2003).

Routledge philosophy guidebook to Plato and the Republic . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-29996-1 .

^ Henry George Liddell and Robert Scott , A Greek–English Lexicon ( LSJ ), revised and augmented by Henry Stuart Jones and Roderick McKenzie, (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1940).

ISBN 978-0-19-864226-8 ^ Strabo , Geography , Book 7 [Alexandria] Chapter 3.

^ Menander (2002).

The Plays and Fragments . Translated by Balme, Maurice. Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-283983-1 .

^ He is supported (or followed) by Theognostus the Grammarian 's 9th century Canones , edited by John Antony Cramer , Anecdota Graeca e codd. manuscriptis bibliothecarum Oxoniensium , vol. 2, ( Oxford University Press , 1835), p. 88.

^ a b Marcus Tullius Cicero , Tusculanae Quaestiones , Book 4, Chapter 11.

^ "misogynist" .

Oxford English Dictionary . Oxford University Press.

Archived from the original on 13 May 2024 . Retrieved 17 July 2020 .

^ a b Aron, Nina Renata (8 March 2019).

"What Does Misogyny Look Like?" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 7 August 2020 . Retrieved 17 July 2020 .

^ Lester, Amelia (9 October 2012).

"Ladylike: Julia Gillard's Misogyny Speech" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on 15 June 2020 . Retrieved 27 July 2020 .

^ Passant, John (4 January 2013).

"How the poor are shunted into deeper poverty just for political capital" .

The Sydney Morning Herald .

Archived from the original on 16 September 2018 . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ "Dictionary changes 'misogyny' definition after Australian PM's furious attack on conservative leader" .

National Post . Reuters. 17 October 2012.

Archived from the original on 13 May 2024 . Retrieved 17 August 2020 .

^ Holland, J: Misogyny: The World's Oldest Prejudice , pp. 12–13. Avalon Publishing Group, 2006.

^ "Sample Chapter for Faure, B.: The Power of Denial: Buddhism, Purity, and Gender" . Press.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on 5 October 2013 . Retrieved 1 October 2013 .

^ Rogers, Katharine M.

The Troublesome Helpmate: A History of Misogyny in Literature, 1966.

^ Ruthven, K. K (1990).

Feminist literary studies: An introduction . Cambridge University Press. p. 83.

ISBN 978-0-521-39852-7 .

^ "Galatians 3:28 – prooftext or context?" . The council on biblical manhood and womanhood. Archived from the original on 6 February 2015 . Retrieved 6 January 2015 .

^ Hove, Richard.

Equality in Christ? Galatians 3:28 and the Gender Dispute (Wheaton: Crossway, 1999), p. 17.

^ Rinck, Margaret J. (1990).

Christian Men Who Hate Women: Healing Hurting Relationships .

Zondervan . pp.

81– 85.

ISBN 978-0-310-51751-1 .

^ West, Christopher (2003).

Theology of the body explained : a commentary on John Paul II's "Gospel of the body" . with a foreword by George Weigel. Leominster, Herefordshire: Gracewing.

ISBN 978-0-85244-600-3 .

^ "Verse 34 of Chapter 4 is an oft-cited Verse in the Qur'an used to demonstrate that Islam is structurally patriarchal, and thus Islam internalises male dominance."
Dahlia Eissa, " Constructing the Notion of Male Superiority over Women in Islam Archived 16 January 2015 at the Wayback Machine : The influence of sex and gender stereotyping in the interpretation of the Qur'an and the implications for a modernist exegesis of rights", Occasional Paper 11 in Occasional Papers (Empowerment International, 1999).

^ Nomani, Asra Q. (22 October 2006).

"Clothes Aren't the Issue" .

Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 22 September 2018 . Retrieved 31 October 2017 .

^ Hashmi, Taj.

Popular Islam and Misogyny: A Case Study of Bangladesh Archived 3 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved August 11, 2008.

^ Caner Dagli , 2 The Cow al-Baqarah , Study Quran ^ Julie A. Webber (2004).

Expanding curriculum theory: dis/positions and lines of flight . Psychology Press. p. 87.

ISBN 978-0-8058-4665-2 .

^ Bal, Jaspreet; Daman, Santbir Singh Sarkar (2021).

"Reintegrating the Feminine Voice Inherent in Sikh Scripture" .

Feminist Studies in Religion .

37 (2).

Archived from the original on 17 December 2022 . Retrieved 17 December 2022 .

^ a b Clack, Beverley (1999).

Misogyny in the Western Philosophical Tradition: A Reader . New York: Routledge. pp.

95– 241.

ISBN 978-0-415-92182-4 .

^ Witt, Charlotte; Shapiro, Lisa (2017), "Feminist History of Philosophy" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2017 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, archived from the original on 18 March 2019 , retrieved 21 August 2018 ^ a b Witt, Charlotte; Shapiro, Lisa (1 January 2016). Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

Feminist History of Philosophy (Spring 2016 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 13 May 2024 . Retrieved 10 February 2016 .

^ a b Smith, Nicholas D. (1983).

"Plato and Aristotle on the Nature of Women" .

Journal of the History of Philosophy .

21 (4): 467– 478.

doi : 10.1353/hph.1983.0090 .

S2CID 170449773 .

Archived from the original on 20 May 2020 . Retrieved 10 February 2016 .

^ History of Animals, 608b. 1–14 [ full citation needed ] ^ Blum, C. (2010). "Rousseau and Feminist Revision".

Eighteenth-Century Life .

34 (3): 51– 54.

doi : 10.1215/00982601-2010-012 .

S2CID 145091289 .

^ a b c d e Grimwood, Tom (1 January 2008).

"The Limits of Misogyny: Schopenhauer, "On Women" " .

Kritike: An Online Journal of Philosophy .

2 (2): 131– 145.

doi : 10.3860/krit.v2i2.854 .

Archived from the original on 23 February 2016 . Retrieved 16 February 2016 .

^ Durant, Will (1983).

The Story of Philosophy . New York, N.Y.: Simon and Schuster. p. 257.

ISBN 978-0-671-20159-3 .

^ Nietzsche, Friedrich (1886).

Beyond Good and Evil . Germany.

Archived from the original on 16 December 2013 . Retrieved 23 January 2014 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Burgard, Peter J. (May 1994).

Nietzsche and the Feminine . Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia Press. p. 11.

ISBN 978-0-8139-1495-4 .

^ Nietzsche, Friedrich (1889).

Twilight of the Idols . Germany.

ISBN 978-0-14-044514-5 .

Archived from the original on 26 April 2007 . Retrieved 23 January 2014 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Robert C. Holub, Nietzsche and The Women's Question .

Coursework for Berkeley University.

^ Gallagher, Shaun (1997).

Hegel, history, and interpretation . SUNY Press. p. 235.

ISBN 978-0-7914-3381-2 .

^ Alanen, Lilli; Witt, Charlotte (2004).

Feminist Reflections on the History of Philosophy . Springer.

ISBN 978-1-4020-2488-7 .

^ Radford, Jill; Russell, Diana E. H. (1992).

Femicide: The Politics of Woman Killing . Twayne.

ISBN 978-0-8057-9026-9 .

^ a b DiBranco, Alex (10 February 2020).

"Male Supremacist Terrorism as a Rising Threat" .

International Centre for Counter-Terrorism . The Hague. Archived from the original on 20 April 2020 . Retrieved 23 July 2020 .

^ Bosman, Julie; Taylor, Kate; Arango, Tim (10 August 2019).

"A Common Trait Among Mass Killers: Hatred Toward Women" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 27 July 2020 . Retrieved 23 July 2020 .

^ a b c d Jane, Emma Alice (2014). " 'Back to the kitchen, cunt': speaking the unspeakable about online misogyny".

Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies .

28 (4): 558– 570.

doi : 10.1080/10304312.2014.924479 .

hdl : 1959.4/unsworks_81563 .

S2CID 144492709 .

^ Philipovic, Jill (2007).

"Blogging While Female: How Internet Misogyny Parallels Real-World Harassment" .

Yale Journal of Law and Feminism .

19 (2): 295– 303.

Archived from the original on 26 January 2011 . Retrieved 19 July 2020 .

^ a b Zeinert, Philine; Inie, Nanna; Derczynski, Leon (2021).

"Annotating Online Misogyny" (PDF) .

Proceedings of the Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 August 2021 . Retrieved 2 July 2021 .

^ Tougas, Francine; Brown, Rupert; Beaton, Ann M.; Joly, Stéphane (1995). "Neosexism: Plus Ca Change, Plus C'est Pareil".

Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin .

21 (8): 842– 849.

doi : 10.1177/0146167295218007 .

S2CID 144458314 .

^ Nieborg, David; Foxman, Maxwell (14 February 2018). "Mainstreaming Misogyny: The Beginning of the End and the End of the Beginning in Gamergate Coverage". In Vickery J.; Everbach T. (eds.).

Mediating Misogyny . Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

111– 130.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-72917-6_6 .

ISBN 978-3-319-72916-9 .

^ Barker, Kim; Jurasz, Olga (2019). "Online Misogyny: A Challenge for Digital Feminism?".

Journal of International Affairs .

72 (2): 95– 113 – via EBSCO Host.

^ Robertson, Adi (4 January 2015).

" 'About 20' police officers sent to Gamergate critic's former home after fake hostage threat" .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on 25 November 2015 . Retrieved 4 August 2020 .

^ "The use of misogynistic terms on Twitter" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 February 2021 . Retrieved 28 May 2020 .

^ Ging, Debbie; Lynn, Theodore; Rosati, Pierangelo (30 August 2019).

"Neologising misogyny: Urban Dictionary's folksonomies of sexual abuse" .

New Media & Society .

22 (5): 838– 856.

doi : 10.1177/1461444819870306 .

ISSN 1461-4448 .

S2CID 203078731 .

Archived from the original on 13 May 2024 . Retrieved 19 November 2020 .

^ Halpin, Michael (December 2022).

"Weaponized Subordination: How Incels Discredit Themselves to Degrade Women" .

Gender & Society .

36 (6): 813– 837.

doi : 10.1177/08912432221128545 .

ISSN 0891-2432 .

S2CID 252740108 .

^ Halpin, Michael; Richard, Norann; Preston, Kayla; Gosse, Meghan; Maguire, Finlay (6 June 2023).

"Men who hate women: The misogyny of involuntarily celibate men" .

New Media & Society .

27 (1): 424– 442.

doi : 10.1177/14614448231176777 .

ISSN 1461-4448 .

PMC 11661939 .

PMID 39711688 .

S2CID 259786368 .

^ Baele, Stephane J.; Brace, Lewys; Coan, Travis G. (17 November 2021).

"From "Incel" to "Saint": Analyzing the violent worldview behind the 2018 Toronto attack" .

Terrorism and Political Violence .

33 (8): 1667– 1691.

doi : 10.1080/09546553.2019.1638256 .

ISSN 0954-6553 .

S2CID 201361080 .

Archived from the original on 1 May 2021 . Retrieved 15 October 2023 .

^ Witt, Taisto (2 September 2020).

" 'If i cannot have it, i will do everything i can to destroy it.' the canonization of Elliot Rodger: 'Incel' masculinities, secular sainthood, and justifications of ideological violence" .

Social Identities .

26 (5): 675– 689.

doi : 10.1080/13504630.2020.1787132 .

ISSN 1350-4630 .

S2CID 222803708 .

Archived from the original on 7 March 2024 . Retrieved 15 October 2023 .

^ Futrelle, David (1 April 2019).

"The 'alt-right' is fuelled by toxic masculinity — and vice versa" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on 24 November 2019 . Retrieved 5 November 2020 .

^ Reaves, Jessica (31 July 2018).

"Mapping the Male Supremacy Movement: The Alt-Right's Woman Problem" .

Ms.

Archived from the original on 26 May 2023 . Retrieved 27 October 2020 .

^ Szymanski, Dawn M.; Gupta, Arpana; Carr, Erika R.; Stewart, Destin (2009). "Internalized Misogyny as a Moderator of the Link between Sexist Events and Women's Psychological Distress".

Sex Roles .

61 ( 1– 2): 101– 109.

doi : 10.1007/s11199-009-9611-y .

ISSN 0360-0025 .

^ Srivastava, Kalpana; Chaudhury, Suprakash; Bhat, P. S.; Sahu, Samiksha (2017).

"Misogyny, feminism, and sexual harassment" .

Indian Journal of Psychiatry .

26 (2): 111– 113.

doi : 10.4103/ipj.ipj_32_18 .

PMC 6058438 .

PMID 30089955 .

^ Brooks, Franklin L. (11 October 2008). "Beneath Contempt: The Mistreatment of Non-Traditional/Gender Atypical Boys".

Journal of Gay & Lesbian Social Services .

12 ( 1– 2): 107– 115.

doi : 10.1300/J041v12n01_06 .

S2CID 147560883 .

^ Lewis, Helen (16 January 2020).

"Meghan, Kate, and the Architecture of Misogyny" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on 20 June 2023 . Retrieved 14 July 2020 .

^ Marchese, David (9 July 2018).

"Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie: The novelist on being a "feminist icon," Philip Roth's humanist misogyny, and the sadness in Melania Trump" .

Vulture . Vox Media.

Archived from the original on 17 July 2020 . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

^ Dworkin, Andria (1974).

Woman Hating (PDF) . New York: Penguin Group.

ISBN 978-0-525-47423-4 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 July 2023 . Retrieved 14 July 2020 .

For an interpretation, see: Gupta, Shivangi (12 July 2019).

"Book Review: Woman Hating By Andrea Dworkin" .

Feminism in India . FII Media Private Limited.

Archived from the original on 24 September 2020 . Retrieved 14 July 2020 .

^ Dworkin, Andria (1983).

Right-Wing Women . New York: Perigee Books.

ISBN 978-0-399-50671-0 .

^ E.g., Kate Millet's Sexual Politics , adapted from her doctoral dissertation is normally cited as the originator of this viewpoint; though Katharine M Rogers had also published similar ideas previously.

^ Fisher, Max (25 April 2012).

"The Real Roots of Sexism in the Middle East (It's Not Islam, Race, or 'Hate')" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on 30 July 2023 . Retrieved 14 July 2020 .

^ Berlatsky, Noah (5 June 2014).

"Can Men Really Be Feminists?" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on 30 July 2023 . Retrieved 14 July 2020 .

^ Serano, Julia (2007).

Whipping Girl . Berkeley: Seal Press. p. 15.

ISBN 978-1-58005-154-5 .

^ a b Hallstead, Tracy M. (2013).

Pygmalion's Chisel: For Women Who Are "Never Good Enough" . Cambridge Scholars Publishing. pp.

16– 18.

ISBN 978-1-4438-4884-8 .

^ Hamilton, Edith (June 1953).

Mythology (PDF) . Calcutta: Tridibesh Basu. p. 108.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 March 2023 . Retrieved 13 June 2021 .

^ "Aggravating and mitigating factors" . Sentencing Council.

Archived from the original on 14 August 2018 . Retrieved 2 November 2018 .

^ Brooks, Libby (9 July 2018).

"UK police chiefs urged to adopt harassment of women as hate crime" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 13 May 2024 . Retrieved 2 November 2018 .

^ "Misogyny hate crime in Nottinghamshire gives 'shocking' results" .

BBC News . 9 July 2018.

Archived from the original on 27 September 2018 . Retrieved 2 November 2018 .

^ "Misogyny could become hate crime as legal review is announced" .

BBC News . 6 September 2018.

Archived from the original on 9 October 2018 . Retrieved 2 November 2018 .

^ Grierson, Jamie (16 October 2018).

"Review of UK hate crime law to consider misogyny and ageism" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 13 May 2024 . Retrieved 2 November 2018 .

^ Tobin, Olivia (2 November 2018).

"Met chief Cressida Dick backs senior police officer Sara Thornton on tackling burglars and violence ahead of hate crimes" .

Evening Standard .

Archived from the original on 19 November 2018 . Retrieved 2 November 2018 .

^ "Focus on violent crime not misogyny, says police chief" .

BBC News . 1 November 2018.

Archived from the original on 2 November 2018 . Retrieved 2 November 2018 .

^ "Reforms to hate crime laws to make them fairer, and to protect women for the first time" .

www.lawcom.gov.uk . 23 September 2020.

Archived from the original on 6 October 2020 . Retrieved 23 September 2020 .

^ Scott, Jennifer (23 September 2020).

"Misogyny: Women 'should be protected' under hate crime laws" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 23 September 2020 . Retrieved 23 September 2020 .

^ "Tory peers to defy Boris Johnson with push to make misogyny a hate crime" .

The Guardian . 8 October 2021.

Archived from the original on 13 May 2024 . Retrieved 12 October 2021 .

Further reading Boteach, Shmuley.

Hating Women: America's Hostile Campaign Against the Fairer Sex . 2005.

Brownmiller, Susan .

Against Our Will: Men, Women, and Rape .

Simon and Schuster , 1975.

Dijkstra, Bram .

Idols of Perversity: Fantasies of Feminine Evil .

Oxford University Press , 1987.

Chodorow, Nancy .

The Reproduction of Mothering: Psychoanalysis and the Sociology of Gender .

University of California, Berkeley , 1978.

Ellmann, Mary.

Thinking About Women . 1968.

Forward, Susan, and Joan Torres.

Men Who Hate Women and the Women Who Love Them: When Loving Hurts and You Don't Know Why . Bantam Books, 1986.

ISBN 978-0-553-28037-1 Haskell, Molly .

From Reverence to Rape: The Treatment of Women in the Movies . 1974. University of Chicago Press, 1987.

Kipnis, Laura.

The Female Thing: Dirt, Sex, Envy, Vulnerability . 2006.

ISBN 978-0-375-42417-5 Klein, Melanie .

The Collected Writings of Melanie Klein .

Hogarth Press , 1975.

Lewis, Helen .

Difficult Women: A History Of Feminism In 11 Fights . Jonathan Cape, 2020.

Marshall, Gordon . 'Misogyny'. In Oxford Dictionary of Sociology .

Oxford University Press , 1998.

Millett, Kate .

Sexual Politics .

Doubleday , 1970.

Morgan, Fidelis.

A Misogynist's Source Book .

Patai, Daphne, and Noretta Koertge.

Professing Feminism: Cautionary Tales from the Strange World of Women's Studies . 1995.

ISBN 978-0-465-09827-9 Penelope, Julia .

Speaking Freely: Unlearning the Lies of our Fathers' Tongues . Pergamon Press Canada, 1990.

Smith, Joan.

Misogynies . 1989. Revised 1993.

World Health Organisation Multi-country Study on Women's Health and Domestic Violence against Women * 2005.

External links Look up misogyny in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Misogyny .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Misogyny .

Misogyny, Misandry, and Misanthropy v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons v t e Domestic violence General Outline Abuse Controlling behavior Conflict tactics scale Cycle of abuse Cycle of violence Epidemiology Traumatic bonding Forms Sexual Genital modification and mutilation Marital rape Birth control sabotage Reproductive coercion Sexual violence by intimate partners Physical Acid attack Bride burning Domestic violence and pregnancy Dowry death Honor killing Murder of pregnant women Sati Situational couple violence Psychological Bullying Deny, attack, and reverse victim and offender (DARVO) Economic abuse Embarrassment / Humiliation Emotional blackmail False accusation Gaslighting Intimidation Major depressive disorder Mind games Nagging Narcissistic abuse Passive-aggressive behavior Setting up to fail Silent treatment Stalking Verbal abuse Victims Adults Bride buying Domestic violence against men Domestic violence and pregnancy Elder abuse Intimate partner violence Lesbian Mariticide Misandry Misogyny Parental abuse by children Same-sex relationships Social emotional development Uxoricide Children Adverse childhood experiences Child abuse Effects of domestic violence on children Narcissistic parent Parental bullying of children Sibling abuse Stress in early childhood Prevention Domestic violence hotlines Duluth model Management of domestic violence Women's shelter Prevention initiatives Country Argentina Armenia Albania Australia Bangladesh Bolivia Brazil Chile China Colombia Ecuador Ghana Guyana India Iran Mexico Kenya Lithuania New Zealand Norway Nigeria Norway Pakistan Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Romania Russia Samoa Saudi Arabia South Africa South Korea Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Uganda United Kingdom United States Religion Domestic violence in Christian culture Domestic violence in Islamic culture Experts Academics Jacquelyn Campbell Kenneth Dodge Emily Douglas Mary Ellsberg David Finkelhor Nicola Graham-Kevan Denise Hines Linda Saltzman Murray Straus Activists Ruahine Albert Angela Barker Sarah Buel Elizabeth Celi Anne Cools Donna Ferrato Karen Ingala Smith Ellen Pence Erin Pizzey Deborah Tucker Media Documentaries A Better Man The Conspiracy of Silence Defending Our Lives Power and Control: Domestic Violence in America Silent Voices Sin by Silence Other films American Tragedy Black and Blue Blinded Bordertown The Burning Bed Our Mother's Murder Enough Looking for Angelina Once Were Warriors One Minute to Nine Provoked Sleeping with the Enemy Submission What's Love Got to Do with It Books Life with Billy Mommie Dearest The War on Women Periodicals Contemporary Family Therapy Family Process Family Relations Journal of Family Issues Journal of Interpersonal Violence Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society Trauma, Violence, & Abuse Violence Against Women Organizations Gulabi Gang ManKind Initiative National Coalition Against Domestic Violence National Domestic Violence Hotline Nia Refuge Respect Legal Battered woman defense Domestic violence court v t e Sexual abuse Forms Bride kidnapping Child Child-on-child Child exploitation Child pornography in primary and secondary schools Child prostitution Child sex tourism Cybersex trafficking Forced prostitution Genital modification and mutilation Money marriage Rape Campus Date Gray Marital Prison By proxy Statutory Of males Raptio Revenge porn Sex trafficking Sexual assault Sexual bullying Sexual grooming Sexual harassment in education in education in the United States in the military Sexual misconduct Sexual predator Sexual slavery Sexual violence Statistics War Sociological theories Aggression Causes of sexual violence Effects and aftermath of rape Misandry Misogyny Rape culture Rape trauma syndrome Sociobiological theories of rape Victim blaming Laws Laws regarding child sexual abuse Laws regarding rape Sexually violent predator laws Related topics Child sexual abuse accommodation syndrome False allegation of child sexual abuse Law portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Misogyny&oldid=1301825762 " Categories : Misogyny Gender-related prejudices Sexism Feminist terminology Prejudice and discrimination by type Hidden categories: CS1:Vancouver names with accept markup Webarchive template wayback links All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from March 2025 CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from October 2021 Use British English from October 2021 Articles with excerpts Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles with minor POV problems from September 2023 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2023 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 22:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Misogyny 66 languages Add topic

