Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Origins 3 Non-sociological uses Toggle Non-sociological uses subsection 3.1 Literary criticism 3.2 Use in literary theory 3.3 Body habitus 4 Scholars researching habitus 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Habitus (sociology) 24 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska తెలుగు Türkçe Українська ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia How individuals perceive and react to the social world Part of a series on Sociology History Outline Index Key themes Society Globalization Human behavior Human environmental impact Identity Industrial revolutions 3 / 4 / 5 Popularity Social complexity Social environment Social equality Social equity Social power Social stratification Social structure Social cycle theory Perspectives Conflict theory Critical theory Structural functionalism Positivism Social constructionism Social darwinism Symbolic interactionism Branches Aging Architecture Art Astrosociology Body Criminology Consciousness Culture Death Demography Deviance Disaster Economic Education Emotion ( Jealousy ) Environmental Family Feminist Fiscal Food Gender Generations Health Historical Immigration Industrial Internet Jewry Knowledge Language Law Leisure Literature Marxist Mathematic Medical Military Music Peace, war, and social conflict Philosophy Political Public Punishment Race and ethnicity Religion Rural Science ( History of science ) Social movements Social psychology Sociocybernetics Sociology Space Sport Technology Terrorism Urban Utopian Victimology Visual Methods Quantitative Qualitative Comparative Computational Ethnographic Conversation analysis Historical Interview Mathematical Network analysis Social experiment Survey Major theorists 1700s: Comte · Sieyès 1800s: Martineau · Tocqueville · Marx · Spencer · Le Bon · Ward · Pareto · Tönnies · Veblen · Simmel · Durkheim · Addams · Mead · Weber · Du Bois · Mannheim · Elias 1900s: Fromm · Adorno · Gehlen · Aron · Merton · Nisbet · Mills · Bell · Schoeck · Goffman · Bauman · Foucault · Luhmann · Habermas · Baudrillard · Bourdieu · Giddens Lists Bibliography Terminology Journals Organizations People Timeline By country Society portal v t e In sociology, habitus ( / ˈ h æ b ɪ t ə s / ) is the way that people perceive and respond to the social world they inhabit, by way of their personal habits , skills, and disposition of character.

Overview [ edit ] People with a common cultural background ( social class , religion, and nationality, ethnic group , education, and profession) share a habitus as the way that group culture and personal history shape the mind of a person; consequently, the habitus of a person influences and shapes the social actions of the person.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The sociologist Pierre Bourdieu said that the habitus consists of the hexis , a person's carriage ( posture ) and speech ( accent ), and the mental habits of perception, classification, appreciation, feeling, and action.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The habitus allows the individual person to consider and resolve problems based upon gut feeling and intuition . This way of living (social attitudes, mannerisms, tastes, morality, etc.) influences the availability of opportunities in life; thus the habitus is structured by the person's social class, but also gives structure to the future paths available to the person. Therefore, the reproduction of social structures results from the habitus of the individual persons who compose the given social structure.

The habitus is criticised as being a deterministic concept, because, as social actors , people behave as automata , in the sense proposed in the Monadology of the philosopher G.W. Leibniz .

[ 3 ] Origins [ edit ] The concept of the habitus was used as early as Aristotle .  In contemporary usage it was introduced by Marcel Mauss and later Maurice Merleau-Ponty ; however, it was Pierre Bourdieu who used it as a cornerstone of his sociology, and to address the sociological problem of agency and structure.

In Bourdieu's work, the habitus is shaped by structural position and generates action. Thus, when people act and demonstrate agency, they simultaneously reflect and reproduce social structure. Bourdieu elaborated his theory of the habitus while borrowing ideas on cognitive and generative schemes from Noam Chomsky and Jean Piaget regarding dependency on history and human memory. For instance, a certain behaviour or belief becomes part of a society's structure when the original purpose of that behaviour or belief can no longer be recalled and becomes socialized into individuals of that culture.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] According to Bourdieu, habitus is composed of: systems of durable, transposable dispositions, structured structures predisposed to function as structuring structures, that is, as principles which generate and organize practices and representations that can be objectively adapted to their outcomes without presupposing a conscious aiming at ends or an express mastery of the operations necessary in order to attain them.

[ 6 ] Loïc Wacquant wrote that habitus is an old philosophical notion, originating in the thought of Aristotle , whose notion of hexis ("state") was translated into habitus by the Medieval Scholastics .

[ 7 ] Giorgio Agamben stresses that this term habitus itself "originally signified 'a way of being or acting'" in the Christian monastic tradition; he claims that the term had been in use already among the Stoics as a description of personal attributes synonymous with virtue.

[ 8 ] Bourdieu first adapted the term in his 1967 postface to Erwin Panofsky 's Gothic Architecture and Scholasticism .

[ 9 ] The term was earlier used in sociology by Norbert Elias in The Civilizing Process (1939) and in Marcel Mauss 's account of "body techniques" ( techniques du corps ).  The concept is also present in the work of Max Weber , Gilles Deleuze , and Edmund Husserl .

Mauss defined habitus as those aspects of culture that are anchored in the body or daily practices of individuals, groups, societies, and nations.  It includes the totality of learned habits , bodily skills, styles, tastes, and other non-discursive knowledges that might be said to "go without saying" for a specific group (Bourdieu 1990:66-67) - in that way it can be said to operate beneath the level of rational ideology .

Non-sociological uses [ edit ] Literary criticism [ edit ] The term has also been adopted in literary criticism , adapting from Bourdieu's usage of the term. For example, Joe Moran's examination of authorial identities in Star Authors: Literary Celebrity in America uses the term in discussion of how authors develop a habitus formed around their own celebrity and status as authors, which manifests in their writing.

Use in literary theory [ edit ] Bourdieu's principle of habitus is interwoven with the concept of structuralism in literary theory . Peter Barry explains, "in the structuralist approach to literature there is a constant movement away from interpretation of the individual literary work and a parallel drive towards understanding the larger structures which contain them" (2009, p. 39). There is therefore a strong desire to understand the larger influencing factors which makes an individual literary work. As Bourdieu explains, habitus ... are structured structures, generative principles of distinct and distinctive practices - what the worker eats, and especially the way he eats it, the sport he practices and the way he practices it, his political opinions and the way he expresses them are systematically different from the industrial proprietor's corresponding activities - habitus are also structuring structures, different classifying schemes classification principles, different principles of vision and division, different tastes. Habitus make different differences; they implement distinctions between what is good and what is bad, what is right and what is wrong, between what is distinguished and what is vulgar, and so on, but they are not the same. Thus, for instance, the same behaviour or even the same good can appear distinguished to one person, pretentious to someone else, and cheap or showy to yet another.

— Bourdieu, 1996 As a result, habitus may be employed in literary theory in order to understand those larger, external structures which influence individual theories and works of literature.

Body habitus [ edit ] Not to be confused with Body theory .

Body habitus (or "bodily habitus") is the medical term for physique, and is categorized as either endomorphic (relatively short and stout), ectomorphic (relatively long and thin) or mesomorphic (muscular proportions). In this sense, habitus has in the past been interpreted as the physical and constitutional characteristics of an individual, especially as related to the tendency to develop a certain disease.

[ 10 ] For example, " Marfanoid bodily habitus".

Scholars researching habitus [ edit ] Loïc Wacquant - a sociologist and ethnographer who studied the construction of the "pugilistic habitus" in a boxing gym of the black ghetto of Chicago in Body & Soul: Notebooks of an Apprentice Boxer (2004) and in "Habitus as Topic and Tool" (2009).

Bernard Lahire - a French sociologist who suggested that the habitus is not (or no longer) a system shared by a class, but rather an eclectic set of dispositions that are often contradictory, due to non-typical socialization paths in late modernity.

[ 11 ] Gabriel Ignatow explored how the notion of habitus can contribute to the sociology of morality .

[ 12 ] Philippe Bourgois - an anthropologist who incorporates the concept of "habitus" into much of his work with intravenous drug users in the San Francisco Bay Area.

Saba Mahmood - an anthropologist who suggested that the habitus can be shaped and transformed not only through unconscious mimesis but also through pedagogic process, while reverting from Bourdieu's account to that of Aristotle.

Stephen Parkin - a sociologist who considers the "habitus" construct as an explanatory mechanism for the production of drug related harm in drug using environments located in public settings in "Habitus and Drug Using Environments: Health Place and Lived-Experience" (published by Ashgate in August 2013).

Heinrich Wilhelm Schäfer – Center for the Interdisciplinary Research on Religion and Society (CIRRuS) at Bielefeld University (Germany) Ori Schwarz - a sociologist who studied the "sonic habitus", schemes that organize the production of sounds, their classification (e.g. as "noise") and the reaction to them.

[ 13 ] Loren Ludwig, US - a musicologist researching the way that instrumental chamber music allows for the cultivation and experience of habitus by its players .

Norbert Elias - a German sociologist studying how the habitus is determined on our culturally accepted manners. In ‘’The Civilizing Process’’, his theory is also extended to a 'national habitus' of Germans, used to justify the Holocaust.

[ 14 ] Dov Cohen and Hans IJzerman - psychologists who studied the habitus in social psychology, examining how Latinos and Anglos embody honor differently .

Sudhir Chella Rajan, who shows how automobility forms a complex discursive apparatus built on fragile assumptions around individuality, autonomy, and driving and is so ideologically powerful as to constitute the very bodily disposition of liberal political theory.

Victor J. Friedman and Israel J. Sykes likens the idea of habitus to the idea of theory-in-action developed by Chris Argyris and Donald Schön .

William Cockerham - American medical sociologist , uses Bourdieu's habitus as a basis for his health lifestyle theory.

References [ edit ] ^ Lizardo, O. 2004, "The Cognitive Origins of Bourdieu's Habitus", Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 375–448.

^ a b Bourdieu, Pierre (1977).

Outline of a Theory of Practice . Cambridge University Press.

^ a b Bourdieu, Pierre (2000).

Pascalian Meditations . Stanford University Press.

^ Bourdieu, Pierre (1977).

Outline of a Theory of Practice . Cambridge University Press. pp.

78– 79.

^ Tönnies, Ferdinand (1963).

Community and society . New York, NY: Harper and Row.

^ Bourdieu, Pierre (1990). "The Logic of Practice".

Polity Press .

^ Wacquant, Loïc (2016). "A Concise Genealogy and Anatomy of Habitus".

The Sociological Review .

64 : 64– 65.

doi : 10.1111/1467-954X.12356 .

^ Agamben, Giorgio (2013).

Altissima povertà: Regole monastiche e forme di vita [ The Highest Poverty: Monastic Rules and Form-of-Life ] (in Italian). Translated by Kotsko, Adam. Stanford University Press. p. 13.

ISBN 9780804786744 .

^ Review Archived 2009-04-09 at the Wayback Machine of Holsinger, The Premodern Condition , in Bryn Mawr Review of Comparative Literature 6:1 (Winter 2007).

^ The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (4th Ed) Houghton Mifflin Company, 2003.

^ Lahire, Bernard. 2011. The Plural Actor. Cambridge: Polity.

^ Ignatow, Gabriel (2009). "Why the Sociology of Morality Needs Bourdieu's Habitus".

Sociological Inquiry 79:98-114 .

^ Schwarz, Ori (2015). "The Sound of Stigmatization: Sonic Habitus, Sonic Styles, and Boundary Work in an Urban Slum".

American Journal of Sociology,121:205-242 .

121 (1): 205– 42.

doi : 10.1086/682023 .

PMID 26430711 .

S2CID 10034380 .

^ Elias, Norbert (1939).

The Civilizing Process (5 ed.). Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

ASIN 0631221611 .

Further reading [ edit ] Look up habitus in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Bourdieu, Pierre. 1977.

Outline of a Theory of Practice . Cambridge University Press.

Bourdieu, Pierre and Loïc J.D. Wacquant. 1992.

An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology . The University of Chicago Press.

Elias, Norbert.

The Civilizing Process .

Hilgers, Mathieu. 2009.

Habitus, Freedom and Reflexivity 'Theory and Psychology' Vol. 19 (6), pp. 728-755.

MacLeod, Jay.  1995.

Ain't No Makin' It .  Colorado: Westview Press, Inc.

Maton, Karl. 2012 'Habitus', in Grenfell, M. (ed) Pierre Bourdieu: Key concepts . London: Acumen Press, revised edition.

Mauss, Marcel. 1934. " Les Techniques du corps ", Journal de Psychologie 32 (3-4). Reprinted in Mauss, Sociologie et anthropologie , 1936, Paris: PUF.

Rimmer. Mark. 2010.

Listening to the monkey: Class, youth and the formation of a musical habitus 'Ethnography' Vol. 11 (2), pp. 255-283.

Wacquant, Loïc. 2004.

Body & Soul: Notebooks of an Apprentice Boxer . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Wacquant, Loïc. 2004. "Habitus." pp. 315–319 in International Encyclopedia of Economic Sociology . Edited by Jens Beckert and Milan Zafirovski. London: Routledge.

Authority control databases : National Germany v t e Nonverbal communication Modalities Physical Blushing Body language / Kinesics Body-to-body communication Facial expression Facial Action Coding System Microexpression Subtle expression Gesture List Speech-independent gestures Haptic communication Imitation Interpersonal synchrony Laughter Oculesics Eye contact Pupil dilation Olfaction Posture Proxemics Speech Affect Emotional prosody Paralanguage Intonation Loudness Prosody Rhythm Stress Tone Voice quality Social context Chronemics Conventions Display rules Habitus High-context and low-context cultures Interpersonal relationship Social norm Other Emoticon / Smiley One-bit message Missed call Silent service code Unconscious Microexpression Non-verbal leakage Multi-faceted Affect display Deception Emotion recognition First impression Intimacy Broader concepts Cognitive academic language proficiency Communication Emotional intelligence Nunchi People skills Semiotics Social behavior Social competence Social cue Social skills Unsaid Further information Disorders Aprosodia Asperger syndrome Autism Fragile X Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified Childhood disintegrative disorder Rett syndrome Dyssemia Nonverbal learning disorder Social (pragmatic) communication disorder Neuroanatomy Limbic system / Limbic lobe Mirror neuron Applications Cold reading Lie detection Freudian slip Poker tell Targeted advertising Technology Computer processing of body language Emotion recognition in conversation Gesture recognition List of facial expression databases Sentiment analysis Key people Ray Birdwhistell Charles Darwin Paul Ekman Related Animal communication Behavioral communication Aggressive Assertive Passive Passive-aggressive Impression management Meta-communication Monastic sign lexicons Verbal communication Manual-tactile verbal Sign language Tactile signing Tadoma Art and literature Mime Mimoplastic art Subtext NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐8x5fm
Cached time: 20250814220506
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.487 seconds
Real time usage: 0.591 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1565/1000000
Revision size: 14647/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 88912/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2488/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 60647/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.344/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17534213/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  503.244      1 -total
 25.02%  125.930      1 Template:Reflist
 18.86%   94.934      1 Template:Sociology
 18.52%   93.179      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 17.58%   88.457      6 Template:Cite_book
 13.99%   70.427      1 Template:Lang
 13.29%   66.893      1 Template:Authority_control
 10.53%   52.981      1 Template:Short_description
  5.97%   30.037      2 Template:Pagetype
  3.99%   20.069      1 Template:IPAc-en Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:13291:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220506 and revision id 1292018787. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Habitus_(sociology)&oldid=1292018787 " Categories : Social concepts Political concepts Post-structuralism Sociological terminology Social agreement Pierre Bourdieu Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Webarchive template wayback links Articles using Template:ASIN with an all-numeric value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 19:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Habitus (sociology) 24 languages Add topic

