Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historic estimates 2 See also 3 Notes 4 Works cited Toggle the table of contents Sidereal year 41 languages Afrikaans العربية Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Lietuvių Македонски Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский සිංහල Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Time taken by the Earth to orbit the Sun once with respect to the fixed stars A sidereal year ( / s aɪ ˈ d ɪər i .

əl / , US also / s ɪ -/ ; from Latin sidus ' asterism, star ' ), also called a sidereal orbital period , is the time that Earth or another planetary body takes to orbit the Sun once with respect to the fixed stars .

Hence, for Earth, it is also the time taken for the Sun to return to the same position relative to Earth with respect to the fixed stars after apparently travelling once around the ecliptic .

It equals 365.256 363 004 ephemeris days for the J2000.0 epoch, [ 1 ] or 365 sidereal days , 6 hours, 9 minutes and 9.76 seconds. The sidereal year differs from the solar year , "the period of time required for the ecliptic longitude of the Sun to increase 360 degrees", [ 2 ] due to the precession of the equinoxes .
The sidereal year is 20 min 24.5 s longer than the mean tropical year at J2000.0 ( 365.242 190 402 ephemeris days) , of 365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes, 45 seconds.

[ 1 ] At present, the rate of axial precession corresponds to a period of 25,772 years, [ 3 ] so sidereal year is longer than tropical year by 1,224.5 seconds (20 min 24.5 s, ~365.24219*86400/25772).

Ancient Egypt was aware their year and the sidereal year differed, and developed the Sothic cycle in the second millennium BC, the cycle completed on the heliacal rising of the star Sirius on the new year, which offers a pseudo-sidereal year of just over 365 days and 6 hours.

[ 4 ] Before the discovery of the precession of the equinoxes by Hipparchus in the Hellenistic period , the difference between sidereal and tropical year was unknown to the Greeks.

[ 5 ] For naked-eye observation, the shift of the constellations relative to the equinoxes only becomes apparent over centuries or " ages ", and pre-modern calendars such as Hesiod 's Works and Days would give the times of the year for sowing, harvest, and so on by reference to the first visibility of stars, effectively using the sidereal year.

[ citation needed ] The Indian national calendar , based on the works of Maga Brahmins , as are the calendars of neighbouring countries, is traditionally reckoned by the Sun's entry into the sign of Aries and is also supposed to align with the spring equinox and have relevance to the harvesting and planting season and thus the tropical year.

[ citation needed ] However, as the entry into the constellation occurs 25 days later, according to the astronomical calculation of the sidereal year, this date marks the South and Southeast Asian solar New Year in other countries and cultures [ citation needed ] Historic estimates [ edit ] Historic estimates have been offered by the likes of: [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Egyptian Sothic (c. 1800 BC) - 365 days, 6 hours Hipparchus (c. 190 – c. 120 BC) - 365 + ⁠ 1 / 4 ⁠ + ⁠ 1 / 144 ⁠ days (= 365.25694... days = 365 days 6 hours 10 min).

Paulisa Siddhanta (c. 300 AD) - 365 days, 6 hours, 12 minutes, 36 seconds.

Romaka Siddhanta (c. 300 AD) - 365 days, 5 hours, 55 minutes, 12 seconds (tropical year).

Surya Siddhanta (c. 500-800 AD) - 365 days, 6 hours, 12 minutes, 30.36.56 seconds.

Aryabhatiya (c. 510 AD) - 365 days, 6 hours, 12 minutes, 30 seconds.

Rājamṛgāṅka (c. 1050 AD) - 365 days, 6 hours, 12 minutes, 30.915 seconds.

See also [ edit ] Look up sidereal year in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Anomalistic year Gaussian year Julian year (astronomy) Orbital period Precession § Astronomy Sidereal time Solar calendar Tropical year Mars time Notes [ edit ] ^ a b IERS 2014 .

^ AA 2016 .

^ N. Capitaine et al.

2003 , p. 581 expression 39 ^ "Why Sothic Dates Are Crucial to Egyptian Chronology (But Not as Traditionally Understood) – Synchronologies" . March 3, 2025 . Retrieved August 9, 2025 .

^ Stern, David P. (October 10, 2016).

"Precession" .

NASA's Polar, Wind and Geotail Site . Retrieved April 25, 2022 .

^ Barnett, Lionel D. (April 30, 1999).

Antiquities of India: An Account of the History and Culture of Ancient Hindustan . Atlantic Publishers & Dist.

ISBN 978-81-7156-442-2 .

^ "Hipparchus - Biography" .

Maths History . Retrieved August 4, 2025 .

Works cited [ edit ] "Glossary".

Astronomical Almanac for the Year 2017 . Washington, D.C., and London: United States Naval Observatory , HM Nautical Almanac Office. 2016. p. M19.

"Useful Constants" . International Earth rotation and Reference systems Service (IERS). February 13, 2014 . Retrieved February 29, 2020 .

v t e Time Key concepts Past Present Future Eternity Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC Universal Time TAI Unit of time Orders of magnitude (time) Measurement systems Italian six-hour clock Thai six-hour clock 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Relative hour Daylight saving time Chinese Decimal Hexadecimal Hindu Metric Roman Sidereal Solar Time zone Calendars Main types Solar Lunar Lunisolar Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Solar Hijri Chinese Hindu Panchang Maya List Clocks Main types astronomical astrarium atomic quantum hourglass marine sundial watch 24-hour wristwatch mechanical stopwatch water-based Cuckoo clock Digital clock Grandfather clock History Timeline Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Philosophy of time A series and B series B-theory of time Chronocentrism Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Moving spotlight theory Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Religion Mythology Ages of Man Destiny Immortality Dreamtime Kāla Time and fate deities Father Time Wheel of time Kalachakra Human experience and use of time Chronemics Generation time Mental chronometry Music tempo time signature Rosy retrospection Tense–aspect–mood Time management Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow Time in science Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute space and time Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Instant Proper time Spacetime Theory of relativity Time domain Time translation symmetry Time reversal symmetry Other fields Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Clock reaction Glottochronology Time geography Related Leap year Memory Moment Six-hour day Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time immemorial Time travel Category Commons v t e Time measurement and standards Chronometry Orders of magnitude Metrology International standards Coordinated Universal Time offset UT ΔT DUT1 International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service ISO 31-1 ISO 8601 International Atomic Time 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Barycentric Coordinate Time Barycentric Dynamical Time Civil time Daylight saving time Geocentric Coordinate Time International Date Line IERS Reference Meridian Leap second Solar time Terrestrial Time Time zone 180th meridian Obsolete standards Ephemeris time Greenwich Mean Time Prime meridian Time in physics Absolute space and time Spacetime Chronon Continuous signal Coordinate time Cosmological decade Discrete time and continuous time Proper time Theory of relativity Time dilation Gravitational time dilation Time domain Time-translation symmetry T-symmetry Horology Clock Astrarium Atomic clock Complication History of timekeeping devices Hourglass Marine chronometer Marine sandglass Radio clock Watch stopwatch Water clock Sundial Dialing scales Equation of time History of sundials Sundial markup schema Calendar Gregorian Hebrew Hindu Holocene Islamic (lunar Hijri) Julian Solar Hijri Astronomical Dominical letter Epact Equinox Intercalation Julian day Leap year Lunar Lunisolar Solar Solstice Tropical year Weekday determination Weekday names Archaeology and geology Chronological dating Geologic time scale International Commission on Stratigraphy Astronomical chronology Galactic year Nuclear timescale Precession Sidereal time Other units of time Instant Flick Shake Jiffy Second Minute Moment Hour Day Week Fortnight Month Year Olympiad Lustrum Decade Century Saeculum Millennium Related topics Chronology Duration music Mental chronometry Decimal time Metric time System time Time metrology Time value of money Timekeeper Portals : Physics Astronomy Stars Spaceflight Outer space Solar System Science Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sidereal_year&oldid=1305470085 " Categories : Astronomical coordinate systems Types of year Hindu astrology Technical factors of astrology Hidden categories: Use mdy dates from April 2022 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2020 This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 07:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sidereal year 41 languages Add topic

