Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types 2 Specific stars 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Hypothetical star 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Stars that are believed or speculated to exist This article is about scientifically accepted hypothetical star types. For stars in religion, see Stars proposed in religion . For other hypothetical astronomical objects, see Hypothetical astronomical object .

A hypothetical star is a star, or type of star, that is speculated to exist but has yet to be definitively observed. Hypothetical types of stars have been conjectured to exist, have existed or will exist in the future universe .

Types [ edit ] Scientifically speculated hypothetical types include: Type Description Candidates Notes Citations Blitzar Pulsar with enough mass to suddenly collapse into a black hole when the rotation speed slows.

[ 1 ] Blue dwarf Conjectured to develop after a red dwarf has exhausted most of its hydrogen.

— The universe isn't old enough for this form to come into existence.

Black dwarf The final state for a star, like the Sun , that is too small to become either a black hole or a neutron star . It would take a star like the Sun roughly a quadrillion (10 15 ) years to reach this state, so none are believed to exist today.

— The universe isn't old enough for this form to come into existence.

Black star A star predicted in semiclassical gravity which collapses into a black hole state but has neither a gravitational singularity nor an event horizon .

none Boson star A star or astronomical object made of bosons , such as photons or gluons , rather than conventional matter.

none Dark energy star A conjectured alternative to a black hole.

none Dark matter star Conjectured to have existed early in the universe .

JADES-GS-z13-0 , JADES-GS-z12-0 , and JADES-GS-z11-0 Dark star A theoretical construct based on Newtonian gravitation , of a star with gravity so strong that even light cannot escape.

— This form cannot exist, as Newtonian gravitation breaks down under these conditions. It is a disproved hypothesis Electroweak star A star where gravitational collapse is prevented by radiation pressure resulting from electroweak burning . In this type of star, quarks are converted to leptons via the electroweak interaction . The core of the star would be hand-sized, containing perhaps two earth masses, and might follow from the collapse of a quark star .

none Frozen star A very low-mass star with a surface temperature of only around 300 kelvins that could form in the far future, when the metallicity of the interstellar medium is higher than the current value.

— The universe isn't old enough for this form to come into existence.

[ 2 ] Fuzzball A formulation of black holes in string theory .

none Gravastar An alternative to a black hole that denies the possibility of a singularity .

none Hyperon star A massive neutron star containing hyperons.

PSR J0348+0432 [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Iron star A final state for a star in the far future (10 1500 years) of the universe, when all matter is transmuted to iron via quantum tunneling .

— The universe isn't old enough for this form to come into existence.

MECO A hypothetical alternative to black holes.

Q0957+561 Planck star A star where the energy density is around the Planck density . The star will start to expand as soon as its density reaches the Planck constant . To the black hole, it expands instantly, but to the outside world, it takes eons to expand even the slightest.

none Population III star The very earliest stars, virtually free of metals , believed to have existed in the early universe when the only common elements were primordial hydrogen and helium.

none Preon star A star with a core composed of preons .

none Q star (grey hole) A compact, heavy neutron star with an exotic state of matter where most light does not escape the star.

V404 Cygni [ 5 ] Quark star Star composed of quark matter or strange matter .

3C 58 , PSR B0943+10 , XTE J1739-285 Quasi-star A conjectured star from the early universe with a black hole at its center.

none The universe is too old for this form to come into existence.

Strange star A form of quark star , a neutron star with strange matter at its core, or star which is a ball of strange matter.

none Thorne–Żytkow object A red giant or red supergiant whose core is a neutron star .

HV 11417 White hole The polar opposite of a black hole , it ejects matter from its core into space. It is hypothetically formed when a region around a black hole experiences a loss in entropy, and will immediately collapse when the entropy is restored. The loss of entropy allows the black hole to travel back in time, so it will continue to suck matter up into its event horizon, but once something goes into the event horizon of a white hole, space-time is so distorted that it will always lead you to outside the event horizon, even if you try to go to the singularity.

GRB 060614 Specific stars [ edit ] Specific hypothetical stars include: Star Description Notes Citations Nemesis a star proposed as a companion to the Sun by Richard A. Muller in 1984 This star was disproved back in 2011.

Coatlicue a star thought to be the reason for how the Sun (and many other stars) came to be, proposed by Matthieu Gounelle and Georges Meynet in 2012 3 Cassiopeiae a star recorded by astronomer John Flamsteed , but never seen again 34 Tauri a star recorded by John Flamsteed later revealed to have been the planet Uranus See also [ edit ] Hypothetical astronomical object References [ edit ] ^ " "Extremely short, sharp flash of radio waves from unknown source in the universe, caught as it was happening" " . 2015-01-19.

^ Beech, Martin (2019-03-28).

Introducing the Stars: Formation, Structure and Evolution . Springer. p. 166.

ISBN 9783030117047 .

^ Zhao, Xian-Feng (2017). "Can the massive neutron star PSR J0348+0432 be a hyperon star?".

Acta Physica Polonica B .

48 (2): 171.

arXiv : 1712.08870 .

Bibcode : 2017AcPPB..48..171Z .

doi : 10.5506/APhysPolB.48.171 .

ISSN 0587-4254 .

S2CID 119207371 .

^ Zhao, Xian-Feng (2017-12-23). "The hyperons in the massive neutron star PSR J0348+0432".

Chinese Journal of Physics .

53 (4): 221– 234.

arXiv : 1712.08854 .

doi : 10.6122/CJP.20150601D .

^ K. Brecher; "Gray Holes", American Astronomical Society, 182nd AAS Meeting, #55.07; Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society, Vol. 25, p.89, May 1993, Bibcode : 1993AAS...182.5507B Further reading [ edit ] Schunck,  F.E. and E.W. Mielke: "General relativistic boson stars", Class. Quantum. Grav. Vol. 20, R301 - R356 (2003) v t e Stars List Formation Accretion Molecular cloud Bok globule Young stellar object Protostar Pre-main-sequence Herbig Ae/Be T Tauri Herbig–Haro object Hayashi track Henyey track Evolution Main sequence Red-giant branch Horizontal branch Red clump Asymptotic giant branch post-AGB super-AGB Blue loop Planetary nebula Protoplanetary Wolf–Rayet nebula PG1159 Dredge-up OH/IR Instability strip Luminous blue variable Stellar population Supernova Superluminous Hypernova Classification Early Late Main sequence O B A F G K M Subdwarf O B WR OB Subgiant Giant Blue Red Yellow Bright giant Supergiant Blue Red Yellow Hypergiant Yellow Carbon S CN CH White dwarf Chemically peculiar Am Ap/Bp CEMP HgMn He-weak Barium Lambda Boötis Lead Technetium Be Shell B[e] Helium Extreme Blue straggler Remnants Compact star Parker's star White dwarf Helium planet Neutron Radio-quiet Pulsar Binary X-ray Magnetar Stellar black hole X-ray binary Burster SGR Hypothetical Blue dwarf Black dwarf Exotic Boson Electroweak Strange Preon Planck Dark Dark-energy Quark Q Black hole star Black Hawking Quasi-star Gravastar Thorne–Żytkow object Iron Blitzar White hole Nucleosynthesis Deuterium burning Lithium burning Proton–proton chain CNO cycle Helium flash Triple-alpha process Alpha process C burning Ne burning O burning Si burning s-process r-process p-process Nova Symbiotic Remnant Luminous red nova Recurrent Micronova Supernova Structure Core Convection zone Microturbulence Oscillations Radiation zone Atmosphere Photosphere Starspot Chromosphere Stellar corona Alfvén surface Stellar wind Bubble Bipolar outflow Accretion disk Protoplanetary disk Proplyd Asteroseismology Helioseismology Circumstellar dust Cosmic dust Circumstellar envelope Eddington luminosity Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism Properties Designation Dynamics Effective temperature Luminosity Kinematics Magnetic field Absolute magnitude Mass Metallicity Rotation Gravity darkening Starlight Variable Photometric system Color index Hertzsprung–Russell diagram Color–color diagram Strömgren sphere Kraft break Star systems Binary Contact Common envelope Eclipsing Symbiotic Multiple Cluster Open Globular Super Planetary system Earth-centric observations Sun Solar eclipse Solar radio emission Solar System Sunlight Pole star Circumpolar Constellation Asterism Magnitude Apparent Extinction Photographic Radial velocity Proper motion Parallax Photometric-standard Lists Proper names Arabic Chinese Extremes Most massive Highest temperature Lowest temperature Largest volume Smallest volume Brightest Historical brightest Most luminous Nearest bright Most distant With resolved images With multiple exoplanets Brown dwarfs Red dwarfs White dwarfs Milky Way novae Supernovae Candidates Remnants Planetary nebulae Timeline of stellar astronomy Related Substellar object Brown dwarf Desert Sub Planet Galactic year Galaxy Guest Gravity Intergalactic Neutron star merger Planet-hosting stars Stellar collision Stellar engulfment Tidal disruption event Category Stars portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hypothetical_star&oldid=1284555637 " Category : Hypothetical stars Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 April 2025, at 10:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hypothetical star 1 language Add topic

