Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education and career 2 Philosophical work 3 Selected publications 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Dean Zimmerman (philosopher) 3 languages العربية فارسی Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher Dean Zimmerman Education Alma mater Mankato State University Brown University Philosophical work Era 21st-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytical philosophy Institutions Rutgers University Main interests Metaphysics philosophy of mind philosophy of religion Dean W. Zimmerman is an American professor of philosophy at Rutgers University [ 1 ] specializing in metaphysics and philosophy of religion .

Education and career [ edit ] Zimmerman received his bachelor's degree from Mankato State University in 1987 in French, philosophy, and English. He went on to receive a Master of Arts degree from Brown University in 1990 and then a Doctor of Philosophy degree from the same institution in 1992, where he worked with Jaegwon Kim and Roderick Chisholm .

[ 2 ] He taught at the University of Notre Dame and Syracuse University [ 3 ] prior to joining Rutgers University, where he is also now Director of the Rutgers Center for the Philosophy of Religion. Zimmerman was hired to Rutgers at the same time as John Hawthorne and Ted Sider.

[ 4 ] Zimmerman is a Christian and a member of the Society of Christian Philosophers .

[ 5 ] He also serves on the board of advisors of the Marc Sanders Foundation, [ 6 ] which awards prizes for outstanding work in philosophy.

Philosophical work [ edit ] Zimmerman is an influential figure in contemporary metaphysics, [ 7 ] [ 8 ] and has worked on issues in the philosophy of time, on personhood and material constitution, the metaphysics of mind. In philosophy of religion, Zimmerman has worked on divine foreknowledge and human free will, and God and time. He has defended emergent substance dualism .

[ 9 ] He is also a keyboardist for the band Jigs and the Pigs.

[ 10 ] Selected publications [ edit ] Articles Dualism in the Philosophy of Mind . In John Corcoran.

Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2nd Edition (Macmillan, 2006) From Experience to Experiencer . In Mark Baker and Stewart Goetz .

The Soul Hypothesis (Continuum Press, 2011) Books Metaphysics: The Big Questions co-edited with Peter van Inwagen (Blackwell, 1st ed. 1998, 2nd ed. 2008) The Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics co-edited with Michael Loux  (OUP, 2003) Persons: Human and Divine co-edited with Peter van Inwagen (OUP, 2007) Contemporary Debates in Metaphysics co-edited with Ted Sider and John Hawthorne (Blackwell, 2008) Oxford Studies in Metaphysics co-edited with Karen Bennett (OUP, 2008–2014) God in an Open Universe co-edited with William Hasker and Thomas Jay Oord (Pickwick, 2011) See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers References [ edit ] ^ "Zimmerman, Dean" . Philosophy.rutgers.edu. Archived from the original on 2017-11-12 . Retrieved 2016-02-20 .

^ "Curriculum Vitae - Dean W. Zimmerman" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 January 2013 . Retrieved 20 February 2016 .

^ "Prof. Dean Zimmerman" . Archived from the original on June 7, 2011 . Retrieved April 6, 2009 .

^ Messing, Stacey.

"History" .

philosophy.rutgers.edu . Retrieved 2021-08-15 .

^ "Society of Christian Philosophers - Officers and Committees" . Archived from the original on March 29, 2009 . Retrieved April 6, 2009 .

^ "Who's Who" . Marc Sanders Foundation. Archived from the original on 2018-07-07 . Retrieved 2016-02-20 .

^ "Oxford University Press: Metaphysics" . Archived from the original on December 26, 2010 . Retrieved December 8, 2010 .

^ The Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics - Hardcover - Michael J. Loux; Dean W. Zimmerman - Oxford University Press . Oxford Handbooks. Ukcatalogue.oup.com. 2003-10-30.

ISBN 9780198250241 . Retrieved 2016-02-20 .

^ Robinson, Howard (2011).

"The Soul Hypothesis: Investigations into the Existence of the Soul" .

Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews .

Archived from the original on September 30, 2023.

^ "Jigs and the Pigs" .

SoundCloud .

Portals : Biography Christianity Philosophy Religion v t e Mind–body dualism Types Cartesian dualism Emergent dualism Non-Cartesian dualism Predicate dualism Property dualism Substance dualism Thomistic dualism Dualists Robert F. Almeder Mario Beauregard Frank B. Dilley John Beloff René Descartes Michael Egnor C. Stephen Evans Edward Feser Richard Fumerton Brie Gertler Stewart Goetz W. D. Hart William Hasker Michael Huemer Edward Francis Kelly Charles Landesman E. J. Lowe David. H. Lund Geoffrey Madell J. P. Moreland Denyse O'Leary Martine Nida-Rümelin Scott B. Rae Daniel N. Robinson Howard D. Roelofs Howard Robinson Jeffrey M. Schwartz Richard Swinburne Charles Taliaferro William Homan Thorpe Peter Unger Keith Yandell Dean Zimmerman Related Cartesianism Dualism (Indian philosophy) Interactionism Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics PhilPeople Artists MusicBrainz Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dean_Zimmerman_(philosopher)&oldid=1248352552 " Categories : 20th-century American philosophers 21st-century American philosophers American Christian writers American philosophers of mind Analytic philosophers Analytic theologians Brown University Graduate School alumni Christian philosophers Dualists American philosophers of religion American metaphysicians Rutgers University faculty Living people Minnesota State University, Mankato alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Year of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 29 September 2024, at 01:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dean Zimmerman (philosopher) 3 languages Add topic

