Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Scientific discipline 2 Scholars 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Ethnology 93 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Arpetan Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Македонски Malagasy مصرى Bahasa Melayu Мокшень Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Papiamentu پښتو Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Võro Winaray 吴语 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of anthropology Not to be confused with Ethology , Ethnography , Etiology , or Ecology .

For the journal, see Ethnology (journal) .

Part of a series on Anthropology Outline History Types Archaeological Biological Cultural Linguistic Social Archaeological Aerial Aviation Battlefield Biblical Bioarchaeological Environmental Ethnoarchaeological Experimental Feminist Forensic Maritime Paleoethnobotanical Zooarchaeological Biological Anthrozoological Biocultural Evolutionary Forensic Molecular Neurological Nutritional Paleoanthropological Primatological Social Cultural Applied Art Cognitive Cyborg Development Digital Ecological Environmental Economic Political economy Feminist Food Historical Institutional Kinship Legal Media Medical Museums Musical Political Psychological Public Religion Symbolic Transpersonal Urban Visual Linguistic Anthropological Descriptive Ethnological Ethnopoetical Historical Ideology Semiotic Sociological Research framework Anthropometry Ethnography cyber Ethnology Cross-cultural comparison Participant observation Holism Reflexivity Thick description Cultural relativism Ethnocentrism Emic and etic Key concepts Culture Development Ethnicity Evolution sociocultural Gender Kinship and descent Meme Prehistory Race Society Value Colonialism / Postcolonialism Key theories Actor–network theory Alliance theory Boasian anthropology Cross-cultural studies Cultural materialism Culture theory Diffusionism Feminism Functionalism Historical particularism Interpretive Performance studies Political economy Practice theory Structuralism Post-structuralism Systems theory Lists Anthropologists by nationality Anthropology by year Bibliography Journals List of indigenous peoples Organizations v t e Ethnology (from the Ancient Greek : ἔθνος , ethnos meaning ' nation ') [ 1 ] is an academic field and discipline that compares and analyzes the characteristics of different peoples and the relationships between them (compare cultural , social , or sociocultural anthropology ).

[ 2 ] Scientific discipline [ edit ] Adam František Kollár , 1779 Further information: Ethnicity Compared to ethnography , the study of single groups through direct contact with the culture, ethnology takes the research that ethnographers have compiled and then compares and contrasts different cultures.

The term ethnologia ( ethnology ) is credited to Adam Franz Kollár (1718–1783) who used and defined it in his Historiae ivrisqve pvblici Regni Vngariae amoenitates published in Vienna in 1783.

[ 3 ] as: "the science of nations and peoples, or, that study of learned men in which they inquire into the origins, languages, customs, and institutions of various nations, and finally into the fatherland and ancient seats, in order to be able better to judge the nations and peoples in their own times." [ 4 ] Kollár's interest in linguistic and cultural diversity was aroused by the situation in his native multi-ethnic and multilingual Kingdom of Hungary and his roots among its Slovaks , and by the shifts that began to emerge after the gradual retreat of the Ottoman Empire in the more distant Balkans .

[ 5 ] Among the goals of ethnology have been the reconstruction of human history , and the formulation of cultural invariants , such as the incest taboo and culture change, and the formulation of generalizations about " human nature ", a concept which has been criticized since the 19th century by various philosophers ( Hegel , Marx , structuralism , etc.). In some parts of the world, ethnology has developed along independent paths of investigation and pedagogical doctrine, with cultural anthropology becoming dominant especially in the United States , and social anthropology in Great Britain .  The distinction between the three terms is increasingly blurry. Ethnology has been considered an academic field since the late 18th century, especially in Europe and is sometimes conceived of as any comparative study of human groups.

Claude Lévi-Strauss İzmir Ethnography Museum seen from the courtyard The 15th-century exploration of America by European explorers had an important role in formulating new notions of the Occident (the Western world ), such as the notion of the " Other ".  This term was used in conjunction with "savages", which was either seen as a brutal barbarian, or alternatively, as the " noble savage ". Thus, civilization was opposed in a dualist manner to barbary , a classic opposition constitutive of the even more commonly shared ethnocentrism . The progress of ethnology, for example with Claude Lévi-Strauss 's structural anthropology , led to the criticism of conceptions of a linear progress , or the pseudo-opposition between "societies with histories" and "societies without histories", judged too dependent on a limited view of history as constituted by accumulative growth.

Lévi-Strauss often referred to Montaigne 's essay on cannibalism as an early example of ethnology. Lévi-Strauss aimed, through a structural method, at discovering universal invariants in human society, chief among which he believed to be the incest taboo. However, the claims of such cultural universalism have been criticized by various 19th- and 20th-century social thinkers, including Marx, Nietzsche , Foucault , Derrida , Althusser , and Deleuze .

The French school of ethnology was particularly significant for the development of the discipline, since the early 1950s. Important figures in this movement have included Lévi-Strauss, Paul Rivet , Marcel Griaule , Germaine Dieterlen , and Jean Rouch .

Scholars [ edit ] See: List of scholars of ethnology See also [ edit ] Anthropology Cultural anthropology Comparative cultural studies Cross-cultural studies Ethnography Folklore studies Culture Ethnocentrism Evolutionism Indigenous peoples Intangible cultural heritage Postcolonial Decoloniality Primitive culture Primitivism Scientific racism Structural anthropology Structural functionalism Ethnobiology Ethnopoetics Ethnic studies Critical race studies Cultural studies References [ edit ] ^ "ethno-" .

Oxford Dictionaries . Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on May 15, 2013 . Retrieved 21 March 2013 .

^ "ethnology" .

Oxford Dictionaries . Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on May 15, 2013 . Retrieved 21 March 2013 .

^ Zmago Šmitek and Božidar Jezernik, "The anthropological tradition in Slovenia." In: Han F. Vermeulen and Arturo Alvarez Roldán, eds.

Fieldwork and Footnotes: Studies in the History of European Anthropology.

1995.

^ Kollár, Adam František  − Historiae jurisque publici regni Ungariae amoenitates, I-II. Vienna., 1783 ^ Gheorghiţă Geană, "Discovering the whole of humankind: the genesis of anthropology through the Hegelian looking-glass." In: Han F. Vermeulen and Arturo Alvarez Roldán, eds.

Fieldwork and Footnotes: Studies in the History of European Anthropology . 1995.

Bibliography [ edit ] Forster, Johann Georg Adam .

Voyage round the World in His Britannic Majesty's Sloop, Resolution, Commanded by Capt. James Cook, during the Years 1772, 3, 4, and 5 (2 vols), London (1777).

Lévi-Strauss, Claude .

The Elementary Structures of Kinship , (1949), Structural Anthropology (1958) Mauss, Marcel . originally published as Essai sur le don. Forme et raison de l'échange dans les sociétés archaïques in 1925, this classic text on gift economy appears in the English edition as The Gift: The Form and Reason for Exchange in Archaic Societies .

Maybury-Lewis, David .

Akwe-Shavante society (1967), The Politics of Ethnicity: Indigenous Peoples in Latin American States (2003).

Clastres, Pierre .

Society Against the State (1974).

Pop, Mihai and Glauco Sanga.

"Problemi generali dell'etnologia europea" , La Ricerca Folklorica , No. 1, La cultura popolare. Questioni teoriche (April 1980), pp. 89–96.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ethnology .

What is European Ethnology?

Webpage "History of German Anthropology/Ethnology 1945/49-1990 Languages describes the languages and ethnic groups found worldwide, grouped by host nation-state.

Division of Anthropology, American Museum of Natural History – over 160,000 objects from Pacific, North American, African, Asian ethnographic collections with images and detailed description, linked to the original catalogue pages, field notebooks, and photographs are available online.

National Museum of Ethnology – Osaka , Japan Texts on Wikisource: Rhyn, G. A. F. Van (1879). " Ethnology ".

The American Cyclopædia .

McGee, W. J. (1905). " Ethnology ".

New International Encyclopedia .

" Ethnology ".

The Nuttall Encyclopædia . 1907.

" Ethnology and ethnography ".

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

" Ethnology ".

The New Student's Reference Work . 1914.

Butler, Amos W. (1920). " Ethnology ".

Encyclopedia Americana .

" Ethnology ".

Collier's New Encyclopedia . 1921.

v t e Ethnicity Concepts Clan Ethnic group Ethnographic group Ethnolinguistic group Ethnonational group Ethnoreligious group Ethnographic realism Diaspora Immigration / Emigration Hyphenated ethnicity Indigenous peoples In-group and out-groups Meta-ethnicity Metroethnicity Minority group Influence Monoethnicity Nation Nationality Panethnicity Polyethnicity Population Race Supraethnicity Symbolic ethnicity Tribe Ethnology Anthropology Ethnic studies Ethnoarchaeology Ethnobiology Ethnobotany Ethnoecology Ethnomycology Ethnozoology Ethnocinema Ethnogeology Ethnography Autoethnography Clinical Critical Institutional Netnography Online Person-centered Salvage Transidioethnography Video Ethnohistory Ethnolinguistics Ethnology Ethnomathematics Ethnostatistics Ethnomedicine Ethnomethodology Ethnomuseology Ethnomusicology Ethnophilosophy Ethnopoetics Ethnopsychopharmacology Ethnoscience Ethnosemiotics Ethnotaxonomy Groups by region World Contemporary ethnic groups Countries by ethnic groups Africa Americas Indigenous Canada Greenland Mexico United States Caribbean Central America South America Asia Central Asia East Asia Northern Asia South Asia Southeast Asia West Asia Australia Aboriginal groups Torres Strait Islanders Europe Oceania Indigenous European Identity and ethnogenesis Cross-race effect Cultural assimilation Cultural identity Demonym Development Endonym Ethnarch Ethnic flag Ethnic option Ethnic origin Ethnic religion Ethnicity in censuses Ethnofiction Ethnonym Folk religion Historical Imagined community Kinship Legendary progenitor Linguistic homeland Mores Mythomoteur Nation-building Nation state National language National myth Origin myth Pantribal sodality Statistext Tribal name Tribalism Detribalization Neotribalism White ethnic Multiethnic society Consociationalism Cultural appropriation Diaspora politics Dominant minority Ethnic democracy Ethnic enclave Ethnic interest group Ethnic majority Ethnic media Ethnic nationalism Ethnic pornography Ethnic theme park Ethnoburb Ethnocracy Ethnographic film Ethnographic village Ethnopluralism Indigenous rights Middleman minority Minority rights Model minority Model minority myth Multinational state Ideology and ethnic conflict Allophilia Ethnic bioweapon Ethnic cleansing Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnic party Ethnic penalty Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Ethnic violence Ethnic riots Ethnocentrism Ethnocide Ethnofuturism Ethnosymbolism Indigenism Indigenization Nativism Remigration Separatist movements Xenocentrism Xenophilia Xenophobia Related Minzu (anthropology) Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9vfvh
Cached time: 20250817044807
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.603 seconds
Real time usage: 0.765 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2903/1000000
Revision size: 9407/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 106050/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 16867/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 59003/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.407/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16342670/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  662.240      1 -total
 18.89%  125.107      1 Template:Langx
 15.82%  104.755      1 Template:Anthropology
 15.48%  102.518      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.36%  101.735      1 Template:Reflist
 13.06%   86.461      2 Template:Cite_web
 10.75%   71.222      1 Template:Short_description
 10.51%   69.606      1 Template:Wikisource-inline
 10.25%   67.867      1 Template:Sister-inline
  7.77%   51.487      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:9928:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044807 and revision id 1302073289. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ethnology&oldid=1302073289 " Categories : Ethnology Ethnicity Cultural anthropology Sociological theories Sociology of culture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia with a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Nuttall Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW with an wstitle parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Collier's Encyclopedia This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 06:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ethnology 93 languages Add topic

