Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Archaeological remains Toggle Archaeological remains subsection 2.1 Palaiapolis 2.2 Neapolis 2.3 Image gallery 2.4 Roman city 3 Necropolis Toggle Necropolis subsection 3.1 Early Greeks and Iberians (6th–3rd century BC) 3.2 Late Republican (2nd–1st century BC) 3.3 Early Roman Empire (1st century BC – 2nd century AD) 3.4 Late Roman empire (3rd – 6th century) 4 The Archaeology Museum of Catalonia 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Empúries 25 languages العربية Català Cebuano Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°08′05″N 03°07′14″E ﻿ / ﻿ 42.13472°N 3.12056°E ﻿ / 42.13472; 3.12056 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient city on the Mediterranean coast in the south-east of the Iberian Peninsula "Emporion" redirects here. For the ancient trading outposts, see Emporia (ancient Greece) . For other uses, see Emporium (disambiguation) .

For the medieval county centered on the town of Empúries, see County of Empúries .

Empúries Empúries (in Catalan) Ampurias (in Spanish) Ἐμπόριον (in Greek) Emporiae (in Latin) Palaeochristian basilica at Empúries Shown within Province of Girona Show map of Province of Girona Empúries (Catalonia) Show map of Catalonia Empúries (Spain) Show map of Spain Location Alt Empordà , Province of Girona , Catalonia , Spain Coordinates 42°08′05″N 03°07′14″E ﻿ / ﻿ 42.13472°N 3.12056°E ﻿ / 42.13472; 3.12056 Type Settlement History Builder Colonists from Phocaea Founded 575 BC Periods Archaic Greek to Early Medieval Empúries ( Catalan : Empúries [əmˈpuɾiəs] ) was an ancient Greek city on the Mediterranean coast of Catalonia , Spain .  Empúries is also known by its Spanish name, Ampurias ( Spanish : Ampurias [amˈpuɾjas] ).  The city Ἐμπόριον ( Greek : Ἐμπόριον , Emporion, meaning "trading place", cf.

emporion ) was founded in 575 BC by Greeks from Phocaea . The invasion of Gaul from Iberia by Hannibal the Carthaginian general in 218 BC, prompted the Romans to occupy the city ( Latin : Emporiae ), thus initiating the Roman conquest of Hispania . In the Early Middle Ages , the city's exposed coastal position left it open to marauders and it was abandoned.

Empúries is located within the Catalan comarca of Alt Empordà on the Costa Brava . The ruins are midway between the town of L'Escala and the tiny village of Sant Martí d'Empúries .

History [ edit ] Further information: Greeks in pre-Roman Gaul Emporiae coins, 5th-1st century BC.

Map of the Ruïnes d’Empúries .

Greek kalyx krater found at Empúries Empúries was founded on a small island at the mouth of the river Fluvià , in a region inhabited by the Indigetes (at the present time, the mouth of the Fluvià is about 6 km to the north). This city came to be known as the Palaiapolis , the "old city" when, towards 550 BC, the inhabitants moved to the mainland, creating the Neapolis , the "new city".

After the conquest of Phocaea by the Persian king Cyrus II in 530 BC, the new city's population increased considerably through the influx of refugees. In the face of strong pressure from Carthage , the city managed to retain its independent Greek character. Political and commercial agreements were concluded with the indigenous population long settled in the nearby city of Indika. Situated as it was on the coastal commercial route between Greek Massalia ( Marseille ) and Tartessos in the far south of Hispania , the city developed into a large economic and commercial centre as well as being the largest Greek colony in the Iberian Peninsula .

During the Punic Wars , Empúries allied itself with Rome , and Publius Cornelius Scipio initiated the conquest of Hispania from this city in 218 BC by sending his brother Gnaeus Cornelius Scipio Calvus there with Roman troops.

After the conquest of Hispania by the Romans, Empúries remained an independent city-state . However, in the civil war between Pompey and Julius Caesar , it opted for Pompey, and after his defeat it was stripped of its autonomy. A colonia of Roman veterans, named Emporiae , was established near Indika to control the region.

From that time onwards, Empúries began to decline, obscured by the power of Tarraco ( Tarragona ) and Barcino ( Barcelona ). At the end of the 3rd century it became one of the first cities in Spain to admit Christian evangelists. In that century, too, the Greek town was abandoned while the Roman town survived as a mint and the largely ceremonial seat of a coastal county, Castelló d'Empúries, [ 1 ] until the Viking raids of the mid-9th century. Coinage began again under count Hugh II of Empúries (1078–1117).

Archaeological remains [ edit ] Roman wall at Empúries Roman mosaic at Empúries Although the precise location of the town was known since the 15th century, it was only in the 20th century that systematic excavations were carried out. The site is known as Ampurias. The first official excavations started in 1908 and were held by the Junta de Museus de Barcelona and directed by Emili Gandia i Ortega under the instructions of Josep Puig i Cadafalch and Pere Bosch-Gimpera . These excavations are still going on.

Palaiapolis [ edit ] The island on which the Palaiopolis was situated is now part of the mainland and is the site of the medieval village of Sant Martí d'Empúries. The former harbor has silted up as well. Hardly any excavation has been done here.

After the founding of the Neapolis , the old city seems to have functioned as an acropolis (fortress and temple).

Strabo mentions a temple dedicated to Artemis at this site.

Neapolis [ edit ] A Greek mosaic in the Neapolis .  The Greek word "Ηδύκοιτος" ("the pleasure of lying down") is at the top.

The Neapolis consisted of a walled precinct with an irregular ground plan of 200 by 130 m. The walls were built, and repeatedly modified in the period from the 5th to the 2nd century BC. To the west the wall separated the Neapolis from the Iberian town of Indika.

Temple to Serapis at Empúries In the south-west part of the city were various temples, replacing an older one to Artemis , such as a temple to Asclepius , of whom a marble statue was found. In the south-east part was a temple to Zeus - Serapis . The majority of the excavated buildings belong to the Hellenistic period . In addition to houses, some of which are decorated with mosaics and wallpaintings, a number of public buildings have come to light, such as those in the agora and the harbour mole . In the Roman period, thermae and a Palaeo-Christian basilica were built.

To the south and east of the new city was an area that served as a necropolis .

Image gallery [ edit ] Archaeological remains Archaeological Remains with reproduction of Aesclepius Remains of a cistern Remains of Greek temple to Serapis Reproduction of the statue of Aesclepius on the remains of a Greek rampart Ancient water filtration pipes Roman city [ edit ] Only about 20% of the Roman city ( municipium ) has been excavated. The city has the typical orthogonal layout of Roman military camps, with two principal roads meeting at the forum . The Roman city is considerably larger than the Greek one. During the Republican period a temple was built dedicated to the Capitoline Triad : Jupiter , Juno , and Minerva . During the reign of the emperor Augustus a basilica and curia were added.

In the eastern part of the town a number of large houses have been excavated, with an inner courtyard, numerous annexes, floor mosaics, and paintings. In the 2nd century the town was surrounded by a wall without towers. An amphitheatre and palaestra were built outside the wall.

Necropolis [ edit ] The necropolis of Empúries remained in use for a very long period, from the 7th century BC up to the Middle Ages, but many tombs were looted.

Martín Almagro Basch wrote two books [ 2 ] collecting all data on the majority of cemeteries in the area. There are four types: early Greek and Iberian, late Republican, early Roman Empire and late Roman Empire .

[ 3 ] Early Greeks and Iberians (6th–3rd century BC) [ edit ] Ruins of a peristyle home from the Greek period of Empúries Burials were located in the southern and western sides of Neapolis . The western sector was occupied by the so-called necropolis of the wall northeast . Inhumation (Greeks) predominated while a third of burials were cremations (Iberians).

Late Republican (2nd–1st century BC) [ edit ] The ancient necropolis remained in use with inhumations and cremations, possibly Greek and indigenous from the Neapolis . Cremations predominated in another group, possibly of Roman origin, whose cemetery is located on the north side of the neighboring hill of Les Corts, located southwest of the city. This necropolis was in use particularly during the 2nd and 1st centuries BC. Archaeologists found small mounds built with square blocks of stone with the remains of cremation in the middle.

Early Roman Empire (1st century BC – 2nd century AD) [ edit ] No burials have been found clearly from the second quarter of the 1st century BC until the reign of Augustus (about 35 years). Cremation burials then predominated until the reign of Emperor Flavian (at the end of the 1st century AD) around a hillside where the Roman city is located.

Burial rituals changed in the 2nd century AD, with only inhumations found.

[ 4 ] Late Roman empire (3rd – 6th century) [ edit ] Precise chronologies are hampered by the lack of grave goods in tombs. The whole area of the ancient Greek city was filled with inhumation burials, perhaps related to the worship of the early Christian basilica or Cella Memoria, situated there. Burials are also in many of the ancient necropolis of earlier times (as Bonjoan, in use for a thousand years) and in new ones. It is possible they were related to the Roman villae located near them. There is a monument of El Castellet and nearby tombs.

[ 5 ] The Archaeology Museum of Catalonia [ edit ] The branch of the Archaeology Museum of Catalonia in Empúries (MAC-Empúries) offers visitors an experience in direct contact with the archaeological remains there. A visit to the Greek city and the Roman city are complemented by a tour through the museum, which showcases representative objects from the history of the site that have been uncovered in the years of excavations in Empúries.

[ 6 ] The museum has parking facilities and the site may be reached by a traffic-free coastal walk from L'Escala.

See also [ edit ] List of ancient Greek cities List of traditional Greek place names References [ edit ] ^ Though they later became separate, the Frankish counties of Empúries and Peralda were always held by a single individual, according to Stephen P. Bensch, ("Lordship and coinage in Empúries," in The Experience of Power in Medieval Europe , Robert F. Berkhofer , Alan Cooper, Adam J. Kosto, eds. 73-, p. 74.

^ Martín Almagro "Las Necrópolis de Ampurias I: Las Necrópolis Griegas" Barcelona 1953 y Martín Almagro "Las Necrópolis de Ampurias II: Las Necrópolis Romanas e Indígenas. Barcelona 1955.

^ "Alfonso López Borgoñoz "Distribución cronològica y espacial de las necròpolis ampuritanas" en VV.AA. "De les estructures indígenes a l'organització provincial romana de la Hispania Citerior" pp. 275-298.

Institut d'Estudis catalans . Ítaca. Barcelona, 1998" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-09-30 . Retrieved 2011-08-07 .

^ Alfonso López Borgoñoz "Las necrópolis altoimperiales ampuritanas" pp. 711-744.

Annals de l'Institut d'Estudis Gironins . Vol. XXXVII, 1996 - 97 Girona, 1997.

^ Josep M. Nolla; Jordi Sagrera "Ciuitatis Impuritanae Coementeria. Les necròpolis tardanes de la Neàpolis" Girona: Facultat de Lletres de la Universitat de Girona, Girona, 1995, 329 p. Estudi General, 15.

and Josep M. Nolla "Tombes i cementiris del sector nord-oriental del turó d’Empúries" Arqueologia AIEE, Figueres, 33(2000), pàg. 11-20.

^ Generalitat de Catalunya.

"Visitmuseum · Archaeology Museum of Catalonia - Empúries" .

Visitmuseum . Agència Catalana del Patrimoni Cultural . Retrieved 28 August 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Empúries .

Virtual image of the Empúries' ruins Empuries official website Empúries by the Web-newspaper CapCreus online Livius.org: Emporiae ( Archived 2016-05-23 at the Wayback Machine ) v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control databases International VIAF National France BnF data Czech Republic Geographic Pleiades Other IdRef NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐vw4zg
Cached time: 20250817055747
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.591 seconds
Real time usage: 0.814 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2415/1000000
Revision size: 15950/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 181969/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6242/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 51991/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.374/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13281972/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  642.115      1 -total
 33.72%  216.519      1 Template:Infobox_ancient_site
 33.02%  212.050      1 Template:Infobox
 20.62%  132.392      1 Template:Greek_colonies_of_the_Iberian_peninsula
 20.00%  128.413      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 13.49%   86.597      4 Template:In_lang
 12.73%   81.756      1 Template:Reflist
 11.10%   71.260      2 Template:Cite_web
  9.42%   60.510      1 Template:Location_map
  8.72%   55.969      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:127809:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817055747 and revision id 1301654259. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Empúries&oldid=1301654259 " Categories : 575 BC Alt Empordà Ancient Greek archaeological sites in Spain Buildings and structures in the Province of Girona Former populated places in Spain Greek city-states Greek colonies in Iberia Phocaean colonies Populated places established in the 6th century BC Roman amphitheatres in Spain Roman sites in Catalonia Roman towns and cities in Spain Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with Catalan-language sources (ca) Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with Greek-language sources (el) Articles with Latin-language sources (la) Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Catalan-language text Pages with Catalan IPA Articles containing Spanish-language text Pages with Spanish IPA Articles containing Greek-language text Commons link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 01:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Empúries 25 languages Add topic

