Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Dangers Toggle Dangers subsection 1.1 Asbestos in old blankets 1.2 Extinguishing oil/fat fires 2 Operation Toggle Operation subsection 2.1 Electric vehicles fires 3 Maintenance 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Fire blanket 26 languages العربية বাংলা Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Italiano Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Română Русский Simple English Slovenščina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sheet of fire retardant material used to smother fires Fire blanket being used to smother flames Extinguishing of a fire with a fire blanket Fire blanket cabinet A fire blanket is a safety device designed to extinguish incipient (starting) fires . It consists of a sheet of a fire retardant material that is placed over a fire in order to smother it.

Small fire blankets, such as for use in kitchens and around the home are usually made of glass fiber and sometimes kevlar , and are folded into a quick-release contraption for ease of storage.  Larger fire blankets, for use in laboratory and industrial situations, are often made of wool – sometimes treated with a flame retardant chemical such as hexafluorozirconate and zirconium acetate.

[ 1 ] These blankets are usually mounted in vertical quick-release containers so that they can be easily pulled out and wrapped round a person whose clothes are on fire.

Fire blankets, along with fire extinguishers, are fire safety items that can be useful in case of a fire. These nonflammable materials are stable in temperatures up to 1300 °C for Nextel ceramic fibres, [ 2 ] 1200 °C for glass fibers, [ 3 ] 480 °C  for Kevlar, [ 4 ] and 570 °C  for wool.

[ 5 ] These are useful in smothering fires by reducing the amount of oxygen available to the fire. Due to its simplicity, a fire blanket may be more helpful for someone who is inexperienced with fire extinguishers.

Dangers [ edit ] Asbestos in old blankets [ edit ] Some older fire blankets were made of woven asbestos fibres and are not NFPA rated. This can pose a hazard during the decommissioning of old equipment.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Extinguishing oil/fat fires [ edit ] After initial investigation in 2013, and later in 2014, the Netherlands Food and Consumer Product Safety Authority issued a statement that fire blankets should never be used to extinguish an oil/fat fire such as a chip pan fire, even if the icons or text on the blanket indicates the blanket may be used in such a case.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] This includes fire blankets which have been tested according to BS EN 1869.

[ 11 ] In the investigation out of the 22 tested fire blankets, 16 of the fire blankets themselves caught fire. In the other 6 the fire reignited when the blanket was removed after 17 minutes. The Dutch Fire Burn foundation reported [ 12 ] several accidents involving the use of fire blankets when extinguishing oil/fat fires. Consumers may send in their existing fire blankets, which will then receive a sticker stating 'niet geschikt voor olie- en vetbranden' ("not suitable for oil and grease fires"). New products will have this text printed, rather than stickered.

[ 13 ] Operation [ edit ] For a fire to burn, all three elements of the fire triangle must be present: heat, fuel and oxygen. The fire blanket is used to cut off the oxygen supply to the fire, thereby putting it out. The fire blanket must be sealed closely to a solid surface around the fire. Fire blankets usually have two pull down tails visible from outside the packaging. The user should place one hand on each tag and pull down simultaneously removing the blanket from the bag.  The tails are located near the top of the fire blanket which allows the top lip of the fire blanket to fold back over the users' hands, protecting them from heat and direct contact burns. Cover the fire with the fire blanket, and it will help cut the oxygen supply and extinguish the fire. You can also use this method when a part of the body catches fire. The fire blanket must be sealed closely to a solid surface around the fire.

[ citation needed ] Electric vehicles fires [ edit ] EV fires can be extremely difficult to extinguish as lithium batteries can self-reignite. "Up to 150 000 liters of water needed to put out a fire in an electric car ...Teslas may take up to 30,000-40,000 gallons of water, maybe even more, to extinguish the battery pack once it starts burning..." [ 14 ] However, a typical larger fire truck carries only a few thousand liters of water.

A fire blanket is so large that a burning vehicle can be completely covered with it (typical size is e.g. 6 m x 9 m to cover large SUVs) - and are extremely heat-resistant (1000 to 1600+ degrees). Also one has to consider the difference between allowed short-term peak temperature and long-term temperature.

[ 15 ] By putting on a fire blanket, the flames are supposed to be smothered. In a fire test with the fire brigade conducted by the General German Automobile Club, were able to see how the fire blanket actually significantly delays the development of the fire and thus increases the fire brigade's scope for action.

The use of the fire blanket can prevent the fire from spreading to adjacent vehicles or surrounding objects. In addition, the removal of an electric vehicle that has been involved in an accident or has been extinguished can be secured with a fire blanket. Another field of application of the blanket is the quarantine of crashed electric cars at an accident site of towing companies or workshops.

Maintenance [ edit ] The Fire Industry Association (FIA) publish a "Code of Practice for the Commissioning and Maintenance of Fire Blankets Manufactured to BS EN 1869".

[ 16 ] The FIA's code of practice recommends that the responsible person ensures that such fire blankets are subject to annual maintenance by a competent service provider. It also recommends that consideration should be given to the replacement of fire blankets after seven years from the date of commissioning (or as otherwise specified by the fire blanket's manufacturer).

See also [ edit ] Welding blanket References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Fire blankets .

^ Elif Kaynak, Mustafa Erdem Üreyen, Ali Savaş Koparal, Adem Mutlu (May 27, 2020).

"Flame-retardant treatment of wool and wool-rich blends: A study of bath composition" .

Journal of Engineered Fibers and Fabrics .

15 .

doi : 10.1177/1558925020922214 .

S2CID 219758791 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "3M Nextel ceramic fabrics" . Retrieved Dec 24, 2021 .

^ ASM handbook . ASM International. Handbook Committee. (10th ed.). Materials Park, OH: ASM International. 2001. pp.

27– 29.

ISBN 978-1-62708-011-8 .

OCLC 712545628 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ "High-performance Materials" . Retrieved Dec 24, 2021 .

^ "Is wool flame retardant?" . Retrieved Dec 24, 2021 .

^ "Solving the global decommissioning challenge with asbestos waste" (PDF) . Retrieved Dec 24, 2021 .

^ "Can a Fire Blanket Be Dangerous?" . 8 April 2021 . Retrieved Dec 24, 2021 .

^ "NVWA - Niet alle blusdekens blussen olie- en vetbranden" . Archived from the original on 2014-11-07.

^ "NVWA - Belangrijke veiligheidswaarschuwing: blusdekens niet geschikt voor frituurbranden" . Archived from the original on 2014-11-07.

^ http://www.vwa.nl/txmpub/files/?p_file_id=2207490 [ permanent dead link ] ^ https://www.nvwa.nl/txmpub/files/?p_file_id=2204607 [ permanent dead link ] ^ "Vlam in de pan: niet blussen met een blusdeken" .

Nederlandse Brandwonden Stichting . Archived from the original on 2014-11-07.

^ "NVWA - NVWA controleert etikettering blusdekens" . Archived from the original on 2014-11-07.

^ "Up to 150 000 liters of water needed to put out a fire in an electric car" .

Up to 150 000 liters of water needed to put out a fire in an electric car | CTIF - International Association of Fire Services for Safer Citizens through Skilled Firefighters . Retrieved 2023-02-28 .

^ "Löschdecken kaufen für Elektroautos, 1600°C, 6 x 9 m" (in German). 2023-01-30 . Retrieved 2023-02-28 .

^ "Code of Practice for the Commissioning and Maintenance of Fire Blankets Manufactured to BS EN 1869" .

Fire Industry Association Website . Fire Industry Association. May 2016 . Retrieved May 21, 2018 .

[ permanent dead link ] v t e Fire protection Fundamental concepts Backdraft Boiling liquid expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE) Boilover Combustibility and flammability Conflagration Dangerous goods (HAZMAT) Deflagration Detonation Dust explosion Enthalpy of vaporization Explosive Fire classification Fire control Fire loading Fire point Fire triangle Flammability diagram Flammability limit Flammable liquid Flashover Flash point Friction loss Gas leak Heat transfer Jet fire K-factor (fire protection) Pool fire Pyrolysis Spontaneous combustion Structure fire Thermal radiation Water pressure Technology Active fire protection Automatic fire suppression Condensed aerosol fire suppression Detonation flame arrester External water spray system Fire bucket Fire prevention Fire protection Fire retardant Fire-retardant fabric Fire retardant gel Fire-safe polymers Fire safety Fire sprinkler system Fire suppression system Firefighting foam Flame arrester Flame retardant Flashback arrestor Fusible link Gaseous fire suppression Hypoxic air technology for fire prevention Inerting system Intumescent Passive fire protection Personal protective equipment (PPE) Relief valve Spark arrestor Tank blanketing Vehicle fire suppression system Building design Annulus (firestop) Area of refuge Booster pump Compartmentation Crash bar Electromagnetic door holder Electromagnetic lock Emergency exit Emergency light Exit sign Fire curtain Fire cut Fire damper Fire door Fire escape Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire pump Fire sprinkler Firestop Firestop pillow Firewall (construction) Grease duct Heat and smoke vent Packing (firestopping) Penetrant (mechanical, electrical, or structural) Penetration (firestop) Pressurisation ductwork Safety glass Smoke control Smoke damper Smoke exhaust ductwork Smokeproof enclosure Standpipe (firefighting) Fire alarm systems Aspirating smoke detector Carbon monoxide detector Circuit integrity Explosive gas leak detector Fire alarm call box Fire alarm control panel Fire alarm notification appliance Fire drill Flame detector Heat detector Manual fire alarm activation Smoke detector Professions, trades, and services Duct cleaning Fire insurance Fire protection engineering Fireproofing Fire-resistance rating Fire Safety Evaluation System (FSES) Fire test Kitchen exhaust cleaning Listing and approval use and compliance Sprinkler fitting Industry organizations Institution of Fire Engineers (IFE) National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Society of Fire Protection Engineers (SFPE) Underwriters Laboratories (UL) Standards CE marking EN 3 EN 54 EN 16034 Flame spread GHS hazard statements GHS precautionary statements Life Safety Code (NFPA 101) List of R-phrases List of S-phrases Safety data sheet UL 94 Awards Arthur B. Guise Medal Harry C. Bigglestone Award See also Template:Fire Template:Firefighting Template:HVAC Category Commons v t e Laboratory equipment General Heaters Dryers Alcohol burner Bunsen burner Desiccator Heating mantle Hot plate Lab oven Kiln Meker–Fisher burner Striker Teclu burner Water bath Vacuum dry box Mixers Shakers Chemostat Homogenizer Liquid whistle Magnetic stirrer Mortar and pestle Shaker Sonicator Static mixer Stirring rod Vortex mixer Wash bottle Stands Clamps Holders Beaker clamp Clamp holder Tripod Burette clamp Extension clamp Flask clamp Funnel support Iron ring Pinch clamp Retort stand Screw clamp Test tube holder Test tube rack Wire gauze Lab drying rack Containers Storage Agar plate Cryogenic storage dewar Incubator Laminar flow cabinet Microtiter plate Petri dish Picotiter plate Refrigerator Weighing boat Weighing dish Other items Aspirator Autoclave Balance brush Cork borer Crucible Filter paper File Forceps Centrifuge Microscope Pipeclay triangle Spectrophotometer Splint Stopper Scoopula Spatula Test tube brush Wire brush Inoculation needle Inoculation loop Glassware Apparatus Dean–Stark Soxhlet extractor Kipp's Bottles Boston round Condensers Cold finger Liebig Dishes Evaporating Petri Syracuse Watch glass Flasks Büchner Vacuum (Dewar) Erlenmeyer Fernbach Fleaker Florence Retort Round-bottom Schlenk Volumetric Funnels Büchner Hirsch Dropping Separatory Measuring devices Burette Conical measure Cuvette Eye dropper Eudiometer Graduated cylinder Ostwald viscometer Pipette Tubes Drying Cragie Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) Test Thiele Thistle Other items Beaker Bell jar Gas syringe Vial Analytical chemistry Compositional AutoAnalyzer CHN analyzer Colorimeter Inductively coupled plasma (ICP) device Gas chromatograph (GC) Liquid chromatograph (LC) Mass spectrometer (MS) pH indicator pH meter Microscopy Scanning electron microscope (SEM) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) Thermochemistry Calorimeter differential scanning Melting-point apparatus Thermometer Thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA) Other items Analytical balance Colony counter Spiral plater Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) instrument Plate reader Electronics Control devices Bench power supply Current source Voltage source Function generator Galvanostat Pulse generator Potentiostat Measurement Ammeter Logic analyzer Multimeter Network analyzer Oscilloscope Spectrum analyzer Time-domain reflectometer Transistor tester Voltmeter Tools Heat gun Soldering iron Tweezers Wire stripper General Alligator clip Test probe Safety Personal protective equipment (PPE) Lab coat Face shield Respirator Rubber apron Safety shower Eye and hand Acid-resistant gloves Eyewash station Glove box Medical gloves Nitrile gloves Safety glasses Safety goggles Other items Biosafety cabinet Fire blanket Fire extinguisher Fume hood Safety cabinet Solvent cabinet Instruments used in medical laboratories Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fire_blanket&oldid=1306068469 " Categories : Blankets Firefighting equipment Kitchenware Safety equipment American inventions Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: others All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with dead external links from December 2019 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 19:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fire blanket 26 languages Add topic

