Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Conception 2 Approval 3 Design and description 4 Construction 5 Crew 6 Service Toggle Service subsection 6.1 Battle of Hampton Roads 6.1.1 Duel of the ironclads 6.1.2 Events after the battle 6.2 Battle of Drewry's Bluff 6.3 Repairs and refit 6.4 Final voyage 7 Rediscovery Toggle Rediscovery subsection 7.1 Recovery 8 Memorials 9 Legacy 10 In popular culture 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 14 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 14.1 Primary sources 15 Further reading 16 External links Toggle the table of contents USS Monitor 27 languages Български Brezhoneg Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית Latina Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 35°0′6″N 75°24′23″W ﻿ / ﻿ 35.00167°N 75.40639°W ﻿ / 35.00167; -75.40639 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia First ironclad of the US Navy, 1861–1862 This article is about the first USS Monitor , a Civil War ironclad. For the World War II vehicle landing ship, see USS Monitor (LSV-5) .

Drawing of Monitor at sea History United States Name Monitor Ordered 4 October 1861 Builder Continental Iron Works , Greenpoint, Brooklyn Cost $275,000 Laid down 25 October 1861 Launched 30 January 1862 Commissioned 25 February 1862 Fate Lost at sea during a storm, 31 December 1862 (off Cape Hatteras , North Carolina ) Status Wreck located 27 August 1973, partially salvaged General characteristics Type Monitor Displacement 987 long tons (1,003 t ) Tons burthen 776 tons ( bm ) Length 179 ft (54.6 m) Beam 41 ft 6 in (12.6 m) Draft 10 ft 6 in (3.2 m) Installed power 2 × fire-tube boilers 320 ihp (240 kW ) Propulsion 1 × vibrating-lever steam engine 1 × propeller shaft Speed 6 knots (11 km/h; 6.9 mph) Complement 49 officers and enlisted men Armament 2 × 11 in (280 mm) smoothbore Dahlgren guns Armor Gun turret : 8 in (203 mm) Waterline belt : 3–5 in (76–127 mm) Deck : 1 in (25 mm) Pilot house : 9 in (229 mm) USS Monitor U.S. National Register of Historic Places U.S. National Historic Landmark Show map of North Carolina Show map of the United States Nearest city Cape Hatteras, North Carolina Area 9.9 acres (4.0 ha) Built 1861–1862 Architect John Ericsson Architectural style Ironclad warship NRHP reference No.

74002299 [ 1 ] Significant dates Added to NRHP 11 October 1974 Designated NHL 23 June 1986 USS Monitor was an ironclad warship built for the United States Navy during the American Civil War and completed in early 1862, the first such ship commissioned by the Navy.

[ a ] Monitor played a central role in the Battle of Hampton Roads on 9 March under the command of Lieutenant John L. Worden , where she fought the casemate ironclad CSS Virginia (built on the hull of the scuttled steam frigate USS Merrimack ) to a stalemate. The design of the ship was distinguished by its revolving turret , which was designed by American inventor Theodore Timby ; it was quickly duplicated and established the monitor class and type of armored warship built for the American Navy over the next several decades.

The remainder of the ship was designed by Swedish-born engineer and inventor John Ericsson , and built in only 101 days in Brooklyn , New York, on the East River beginning in late 1861.

Monitor presented a new concept in ship design and employed a variety of new inventions and innovations in ship building that caught the attention of the world. The impetus to build Monitor was prompted by the news that the Confederates had raised the scuttled Merrimack and were building an iron-plated armored vessel named the Virginia on her hull in the old Federal naval shipyard at Gosport , near Norfolk , that could effectively engage the Union ships blockading Hampton Roads harbor and the James River leading northwest to Richmond (capital of the Confederacy). They could ultimately advance unchallenged on Washington, D.C.

, up the Potomac River and other seacoast cities. Before Monitor could reach Hampton Roads, the Confederate ironclad had already destroyed the sail frigates USS Cumberland and USS Congress and had run the steam frigate USS Minnesota aground. That night, Monitor arrived and, just as Virginia set to finish off Minnesota and St. Lawrence on the second day, the new Union ironclad confronted the Confederate ship, preventing her from wreaking further destruction on the wooden Union ships. A four-hour battle ensued, each ship pounding the other with close-range cannon fire, although neither ship could destroy or seriously damage the other. This was the first battle fought between armored warships and marked a turning point in naval warfare.

The Confederates were forced to scuttle and destroy Virginia as they withdrew in early May 1862 from Norfolk and its naval shipyard, while Monitor sailed up the James River to support the Union Army during the Peninsula Campaign under General-in-Chief George B. McClellan . The ship participated in the Battle of Drewry's Bluff later that month, and remained in the area giving support to General McClellan's forces on land until she was ordered to join the Union Navy blockaders off North Carolina in December. On her way there, she foundered while under tow during a storm off Cape Hatteras on the last day of the year.

Monitor ' s wreck was discovered in 1973 and has been partially salvaged. Her guns, gun turret , engine, and other relics are on display at the Mariners' Museum in Newport News, Virginia , a few miles from the site of her most important military action.

Conception [ edit ] While the concept of ships protected by armor existed before the advent of the ironclad Monitor , [ 3 ] the need for iron plating on ship arose only after the explosive shell -firing Paixhans gun was introduced to naval warfare in the 1820s. The use of heavy iron plating on the sides of warships was not practical until steam propulsion matured enough to carry its great weight. Developments in gun technology had progressed by the 1840s so that no practical thickness of wood could withstand the power of a shell.

[ 4 ] In response, the United States began construction in 1854 of a steam-powered ironclad warship, Stevens Battery , [ 5 ] but work was delayed and the designer, Robert Stevens , died in 1856, stalling further work. Since there was no pressing need for such a ship at the time, there was little demand to continue work on the unfinished vessel.

[ 6 ] It was France that introduced the first operational armored ships as well as the first shell guns and rifled cannons.

[ 7 ] Experience during the Crimean War of 1854–1855 showed that armored ships could withstand repeated hits without significant damage when French ironclad floating batteries defeated Russian coastal fortifications during the Battle of Kinburn . Ericsson claimed to have sent the French Emperor Napoléon III a proposal for a monitor-type design, with a gun turret, in September 1854, but no record of any such submission could be found in the archives of the French Ministry of the Navy ( Ministre de la Marine ) when they were searched by naval historian James Phinney Baxter III .

[ 8 ] The French followed those ships with the first ocean-going ironclad, the armored frigate Gloire in 1859, and the British responded with HMS Warrior .

[ 5 ] The Union Navy 's attitude towards ironclads changed quickly when it was learned that the Confederates were converting the captured USS Merrimack to an ironclad at the naval shipyard in Norfolk, Virginia. Subsequently, the urgency of Monitor ' s completion and deployment to Hampton Roads was driven by fears of what the Confederate ironclad, now renamed Virginia , would be capable of doing, not only to Union ships but to cities along the coast and riverfronts. Northern newspapers published daily accounts of the Confederates' progress in converting the Merrimack to an ironclad; this prompted the Union Navy to complete and deploy Monitor as soon as possible.

[ 9 ] Word of Merrimack ' s reconstruction and conversion was confirmed in the North in late February 1862 when Mary Louvestre of Norfolk, a freed slave who worked as a housekeeper for one of the Confederate engineers working on Merrimack , [ 10 ] made her way through Confederate lines with news that the Confederates were building an ironclad warship. Concealed in her dress was a message from a Union sympathizer who worked in the Navy Yard warning that the former Merrimack , renamed Virginia by the Confederates, was nearing completion.

[ 11 ] [ b ] Upon her arrival in Washington Louvestre managed to meet with Secretary of the Navy Gideon Welles and informed him that the Confederates were nearing the completion of their ironclad, which surprised Welles. Convinced by the papers Louvestre was carrying, he had production of Monitor sped up. Welles later recorded in his memoirs that "Mrs. Louvestre encountered no small risk in bringing this information ...".

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Approval [ edit ] John Ericsson designed Monitor After the United States received word of the construction of Virginia , Congress appropriated $1.5 million on 3 August 1861 to build one or more armored steamships. It also ordered the creation of a board to inquire into the various designs proposed for armored ships. The Union Navy advertised for proposals for "iron-clad steam vessels of war" on 7 August and Welles appointed three senior officers as the Ironclad Board the following day. Their task was to "examine plans for the completion of iron-clad vessels" and consider its costs.

[ 15 ] [ c ] Ericsson originally made no submission to the board, but became involved when Cornelius Bushnell , the sponsor of the proposal that became the armored sloop USS Galena , needed to have his design reviewed by a naval constructor . The board required a guarantee from Bushnell that his ship would float despite the weight of its armor [ 16 ] and Cornelius H. DeLamater of New York City recommended that Bushnell consult with his friend Ericsson.

[ 17 ] The two first met on 9 September and again on the following day, after Ericsson had time to evaluate Galena 's design. During this second meeting, Ericsson showed Bushnell a model of his own design, the future Monitor , derived from his 1854 design. Bushnell got Ericsson's permission to show the model to Welles, who told Bushnell to show it to the board.

[ 18 ] Upon review of Ericsson's unusual design, the board was skeptical, concerned that such a vessel would not float, especially in rough seas, and rejected the proposal of a completely iron laden ship.

President Lincoln , who had also examined the design, overruled them. Ericsson assured the board his ship would float exclaiming, "The sea shall ride over her and she shall live in it like a duck".

[ 19 ] On 15 September, after further deliberations, the board accepted Ericsson's proposal.

[ 18 ] The Ironclad Board evaluated 17 different designs, but recommended only three for procurement on 16 September, including Ericsson's Monitor design.

[ 20 ] The three ironclad ships selected differed substantially in design and degree of risk.

Monitor was the most innovative design by virtue of its low freeboard , shallow -draft iron hull, and total dependence on steam power. The riskiest element of its design was its rotating gun turret , something that had not previously been tested by any navy.

[ d ] Ericsson's guarantee of delivery in 100 days proved to be decisive in choosing his design despite the risk involved.

[ 22 ] Design and description [ edit ] Model of Monitor Inboard plans of Monitor Monitor was an unusual vessel in almost every respect and was sometimes sarcastically described by the press and other critics as "Ericsson's folly", "cheesebox on a raft" [ 23 ] [ 24 ] and the "Yankee cheesebox".

[ 25 ] The most prominent feature on the vessel was a large cylindrical gun turret mounted amidships above the low-freeboard upper hull , also called the "raft". This extended well past the sides of the lower, more traditionally shaped hull. A small armored pilot house was fitted on the upper deck towards the bow, however, its position prevented Monitor from firing her guns straight forward.

[ 26 ] [ e ] One of Ericsson's prime goals in designing the ship was to present the smallest possible target to enemy gunfire.

[ 27 ] The ship was 179 feet (54.6 m) long overall , had a beam of 41 feet 6 inches (12.6 m) and had a maximum draft of 10 feet 6 inches (3.2 m).

Monitor had a tonnage of 776 tons burthen and displaced 987 long tons (1,003 t). Her crew consisted of 49 officers and enlisted men.

[ 28 ] External videos Working model of vibrating-lever engine of USS Monitor The ship was powered by a two-cylinder horizontal vibrating-lever steam engine , [ 29 ] also designed by Ericsson, which drove a 9-foot (2.7 m) propeller, [ 27 ] whose shaft was nine inches in diameter.

[ 30 ] The engine used steam generated by two horizontal fire-tube boilers [ 31 ] at a maximum pressure of 40 psi (276 kPa ; 3 kgf/cm 2 ).

[ 32 ] The 320- indicated-horsepower (240 kW ) engine was designed to give the ship a top speed of 8 knots (15 km/h; 9.2 mph), but Monitor was 1–2 knots (1.9–3.7 km/h; 1.2–2.3 mph) slower in service.

[ 29 ] The engine had a bore of 36 inches (914 mm) and a stroke of 22 inches (559 mm).

[ 28 ] The ship carried 100 long tons (100 t) of coal.

[ 29 ] Ventilation for the vessel was supplied by two centrifugal blowers near the stern, each of which was powered by a 6-horsepower (4.5 kW) steam engine. One fan circulated air throughout the ship, but the other one forced air through the boilers, which depended on this forced draught. Leather belts connected the blowers to their engines and they would stretch when wet, often disabling the fans and boilers. The ship's pumps were steam operated and water would accumulate in the ship if the pumps could not get enough steam to work.

[ 27 ] Monitor ' s turret measured 20 ft (6.1 m) in diameter and 9 ft (2.7 m) high, constructed with 8 inches (20 cm) of armor (11 inches in front at the gun ports) rendering the overall vessel somewhat top heavy. Its rounded shape helped to deflect cannon shot.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] A pair of steam-powered donkey engines rotated the turret through a set of gears; a full rotation was made in 22.5 seconds during testing on 9 February 1862.

[ 35 ] Fine control of the turret proved to be difficult; as there was no brake the steam engines would have to be placed in reverse if the turret overshot its mark, or another full rotation would have to be made. The only way to see out of the turret was through the gun ports ; when the guns were not in use, or withdrawn for reloading during battle, heavy iron port stoppers would swing down into place to close the gunports.

[ 36 ] Including the guns, the turret weighed approximately 160 long tons (163 t); the entire weight rested on an iron spindle that had to be jacked up using a wedge before the turret could rotate.

[ 37 ] The spindle was 9 inches (23 cm) in diameter which gave it ten times the strength needed in preventing the turret from sliding sideways.

[ 38 ] When not in use, the turret rested on a brass ring on the deck that was intended to form a watertight seal. In service, however, this proved to leak heavily, despite caulking by the crew.

[ 37 ] The gap between the turret and the deck proved to be a problem as debris and shell fragments entered the gap and jammed the turrets of several Passaic -class monitors , which used the same turret design, during the First Battle of Charleston Harbor in April 1863.

[ 39 ] Direct hits on the turret with heavy shot could bend the spindle, which could also jam the turret.

[ 40 ] To gain access to the turret from below, or to hoist up powder and shot during battle, the turret had to rotate to face starboard , which would line up the entry hatch in the floor of the turret with an opening in the deck below.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] The roof of the turret was lightly built to facilitate any needed exchange of the ship's guns and to improve ventilation, with only gravity holding the roof plates in place.

[ 43 ] Side view of the cutaway replica of the turret in the Mariners' Museum , with only one 11-inch (280 mm) Dahlgren gun mounted The turret was intended to mount a pair of 15-inch (380 mm) smoothbore Dahlgren guns , but they were not ready in time and 11-inch (280 mm) guns were substituted, [ 37 ] weighing approximately 16,000 pounds (7,300 kg) each.

Monitor ' s guns used the standard propellant charge of 15 pounds (6.8 kg) specified by the 1860 ordnance for targets "distant", "near", and "ordinary", established by the gun's designer Dahlgren himself.

[ 44 ] They could fire a 136-pound (61.7 kg) round shot or shell up to a range of 3,650 yards (3,340 m) at an elevation of +15°.

[ 45 ] The top of the armored deck was only about 18 inches (460 mm) above the waterline . It was protected by two layers of 1 ⁄ 2 -inch (13 mm) wrought iron armor. The sides of the "raft" consisted of three to five layers of 1-inch (25 mm) iron plates, backed by about 30 inches (762 mm) of pine and oak. Three of the plates extended the full 60-inch (1,524 mm) height of the side, but the two innermost plates did not extend all the way down. Ericsson originally intended to use either six 1-inch plates or a single outer 4-inch (100 mm) plate backed by three 3 ⁄ 4 -inch (19 mm) plates, but the thicker plate required too much time to roll.

[ 46 ] The two innermost plates were riveted together while the outer plates were bolted to the inner ones. A ninth plate, only 3 ⁄ 4 inch (19 mm) thick and 15 inches (381 mm) wide, was bolted over the butt joints of the innermost layer of armor. Glass portholes in the deck provided natural light for the interior of the ship; in action these were covered by iron plates.

[ 27 ] After the duel between the two ironclads at Hampton Roads there was concern by some Navy officials who witnessed the battle that Monitor ' s design might allow for easy boarding by the Confederates. In a letter dated 27 April 1862 Lieutenant Commander O.C. Badger wrote to Lieutenant H. A. Wise, Assistant Inspector of Ordnance, advising the use of "liquid fire", scalding water from the boiler through hoses and pipes, sprayed out via the vents and pilothouse window, to repel enemy boarders.

[ 47 ] Wise who was aboard and inspected Monitor after the battle responded in a letter of 30 April 1862: "With reference to the Monitor, the moment I jumped on board of her after the fight I saw that a steam tug with twenty men could have taken the upper part of her in as many seconds ... I hear that hot water pipes are arranged so as to scald the assailants when they may dare to set foot on her." [ 48 ] The chance to employ such a tactic never arose. There are conflicting accounts as to whether such an anti-personnel provision was installed.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] Construction [ edit ] Launch of Monitor , 1862 Commodore Joseph Smith , Chief of the Bureau of Yards and Docks , sent Ericsson formal notice of the acceptance of his proposal on 21 September 1861. Six days later, Ericsson signed a contract with Bushnell, John F. Winslow and John A. Griswold which stated that the four partners would equally share in the profits or the losses incurred by the construction of the ironclad. There was one major delay, however, over the signing of the actual contract with the government.

[ 51 ] Welles insisted that if Monitor did not prove to be a "complete success", the builders would have to refund every cent to the government.

[ 52 ] Winslow balked at this draconian provision and had to be persuaded by his partners to sign after the Navy rejected his attempt to amend the contract. The contract was finally signed on 4 October for a price of $275,000 [ 53 ] to be paid in installments as work progressed.

[ 54 ] Preliminary work had begun well before that date, however, and Ericsson's consortium contracted with Thomas F. Rowland of the Continental Iron Works at Bushwick Inlet (in modern-day Greenpoint, Brooklyn ) on 25 October for construction of Monitor ' s hull. Her keel was laid the same day. The turret was built and assembled at the Novelty Iron Works in Manhattan , disassembled and shipped to Bushwick Inlet where it was reassembled.

[ 55 ] The ship's steam engines and machinery were constructed at the DeLamater Iron Works , also in Manhattan.

[ 56 ] Chief Engineer Alban C. Stimers , who once served aboard Merrimack , [ 57 ] [ 58 ] was appointed Superintendent of the ship while she was undergoing construction.

[ 59 ] Although never formally assigned to the crew, he remained aboard her as an inspector during her maiden voyage and battle.

[ 58 ] [ 60 ] Construction progressed in fits and starts, plagued by a number of short delays in the delivery of iron and occasional shortages of cash, but they did not delay the ship's progress by more than a few weeks. The hundred days allotted for her construction passed on 12 January, but the Navy chose not to penalize the consortium.

[ 61 ] The name "Monitor", meaning "one who admonishes and corrects wrongdoers", [ 53 ] was proposed by Ericsson on 20 January 1862 and approved by Assistant Secretary of the Navy Gustavus Fox .

[ 62 ] While Ericsson stood on its deck in defiance of all his critics who thought she would never float, [ 63 ] Monitor was launched on 30 January 1862 to the cheers of the watching crowd, even those who had bet that the ship would sink straight to the bottom, [ 64 ] and commissioned on 25 February.

[ 65 ] Even before Monitor was commissioned, she ran an unsuccessful set of sea trials on 19 February. Valve problems with the main engine and one of the fan engines prevented her from reaching the Brooklyn Navy Yard from Bushwick Inlet and she had to be towed there the next day. These issues were easily fixed and Monitor was ordered to sail for Hampton Roads on 26 February, but her departure had to be delayed one day to load ammunition. On the morning of 27 February the ship entered the East River preparatory to leaving New York, but proved to be all but unsteerable and had to be towed back to the navy yard. Upon examination, the steering gear controlling the rudder had been improperly installed and Rowland offered to realign the rudder, which he estimated to take only a day. Ericsson, however, preferred to revise the steering gear by adding an extra set of pulleys as he believed it would take less time. His modification proved to be successful during trials on 4 March.

[ 64 ] [ 66 ] [ 67 ] Gunnery trials were successfully performed the previous day, although Stimers twice nearly caused disasters as he did not understand how the recoil mechanism worked on Ericsson's carriage for the 11-inch guns. Instead of tightening them to reduce the recoil upon firing, he loosened them so that both guns struck the back of the turret, fortunately without hurting anybody or damaging the guns.

[ 68 ] Monitor employed over forty patented inventions and marked a significant departure from the dominant naval vessels of the time.

[ 19 ] [ 69 ] Ericsson's innovative turret design, although not without flaws, facilitated the widespread adoption of rotating guns on warships in navies worldwide.

[ 70 ] Because Monitor was an experimental craft, urgently needed, hurriedly constructed, and almost immediately put to sea, a number of problems were discovered during her maiden voyage to Hampton Roads and during the battle there.

[ 71 ] Yet she was still able to challenge Virginia and prevent her from further destroying the remaining ships in the Union flotilla blockading Hampton Roads.

[ 72 ] During the "boom time" of the Civil War, Ericsson could have made a fortune with his inventions used in Monitor , but instead gave the U.S. government all his Monitor patent rights saying it was his "contribution to the glorious Union cause".

[ 73 ] Crew [ edit ] The original officers at the time of Monitor ' s commissioning were: Officers of USS Monitor at commissioning (25 February 1862) Lieutenant John Lorimer Worden , Commanding Officer Lieutenant Samuel Greene , Executive Officer Third Assistant Engineer, Robinson W. Hands Acting Master , Louis N. Stodder Fourth Assistant Engineer, Mark T. Sunstrom Acting Master, J.N. Webber Acting Assistant Paymaster, William F. Keeler First Assistant Engineer, Isaac Newton Jr.

Acting Assistant Surgeon, Daniel C. Logue [ 74 ] Second Assistant Engineer, Albert B. Campbell Commander Worden in 1862 Monitor 's crew were all volunteers and totaled 49 officers and enlisted men. The ship required ten officers: a commander, an executive officer, four engineers, one medical officer, two masters and a paymaster.

[ 74 ] Before Worden was allowed to select, assemble, and commit a crew to Monitor , the vessel had to be completed.

[ 75 ] Four of the officers were line officers and responsible for the handling of the vessel and operation of guns during battle, while the engineering officers were considered a class unto themselves.

[ 75 ] In Monitor 's turret, Greene and Stodder supervised loading and firing of the two eleven-inch (280 mm) Dahlgrens. Each gun was crewed by eight men.

[ 76 ] In Worden's report of 27 January 1862 to Welles, he stated he believed 17 men and 2 officers would be the maximum number in the turret that allowed the crew to work without getting in each other's way.

[ 77 ] USS Monitor officers on deck, posed by her armored gun turret, while the ship was in the James River, Virginia, 9 July 1862. The US Navy Library identifies them as: Top row, left to right : Second Assistant Engineer Albert B. Campbell · Third Assistant Engineer Mark Trueman Sunstrom · Acting Assistant Paymaster William F. Keeler · Lieutenant L. Howard Newman (Executive Officer of USS Galena ) Middle row, left to right : Acting Master Louis N. Stodder · Master's Mate George Frederickson · Acting Volunteer Lieutenant William Flye · Acting Assistant Surgeon Daniel C. Logue · Lieutenant Samuel Greene .

Seated on deck in front, left to right : Third Assistant Engineer Robinson W. Hands · Acting Master E.V. Gager.

[ 78 ] A similar photograph shows Monitor officer First Assistant Engineer Isaac Newton.

[ 79 ] Monitor also required petty officers: among them was Daniel Toffey, Worden's nephew. Worden had selected Toffey to serve as his captain's clerk. Two black Americans were also among the enlisted men in the crew.

[ 80 ] Living quarters for the senior officers consisted of eight separate well-furnished cabins, each provided with a small oak table and chair, an oil lamp, shelves and drawers and a canvas floor covering covered with a rug. The entire crew were given goat-skin mats to sleep on. Lighting for each living area was provided by small skylights in the deck above, which were covered by an iron hatch during battle. The officer's wardroom was located forward of the berth deck where officers would eat their meals, hold meetings or socialize during what little spare time they had. It was well furnished with an oriental rug, a large oak table and other such items. Ericsson had personally paid for the costs of all the officer's furnishings.

[ 81 ] Many details of Monitor ' s history and insights of everyday crew life have been discovered from correspondence sent from the various crew members to family and friends while serving aboard the ironclad. In particular the correspondence of George S. Geer , who sent more than 80 letters, often referred to as The Monitor Chronicles , [ f ] to his wife Martha during the entire time of Monitor ' s service provide many details and insights into every chapter of the ironclad's short-lived history, offering a rare perspective of a sailor's experience on the naval front during the Civil War. The letters of Acting Paymaster William F. Keeler to his wife Anna also corroborate many of the accounts of affairs that took place aboard Monitor . The letters of Geer and Keeler are available for viewing and are housed at the Mariners' Museum in Virginia.

[ 82 ] Other crew members were interviewed later in life, like Louis N. Stodder , one of the last crew members to abandon Monitor minutes before she sank in a storm at sea, [ 83 ] who was the last surviving crew member of Monitor and lived well into the 20th century.

[ 84 ] Service [ edit ] On 6 March 1862, the ship departed New York bound for Fort Monroe , Virginia, towed by the ocean-going tug Seth Low and accompanied by the gunboats Currituck and Sachem .

[ 85 ] Worden, not trusting the seal between the turret and the hull, and ignoring Ericsson's advice, [ 86 ] wedged the former in the up position and stuffed oakum and sail cloth in the gap.

[ 87 ] Rising seas that night washed the oakum away and water poured underneath the turret, as well as through the hawsepipe , various hatches, ventilation pipes, and the two funnels , so that the belts for the ventilation and boiler fans loosened and fell off and the fires in the boilers were nearly extinguished over the course of the next day; this created a toxic atmosphere in the engine room that knocked out most of the engine-room crew. First Assistant Engineer Isaac Newton ordered the engine room abandoned and had the able-bodied crew drag the afflicted engine room hands to the top of the turret where the fresh air could revive them.

[ 86 ] Both Newton and Stimers worked desperately to get the blowers to work, but they too succumbed to the noxious fumes and were taken above.

[ 88 ] One fireman was able to punch a hole in the fan box, drain the water, and restart the fan. Later that night, the wheel ropes controlling the ship's rudder jammed, making it nearly impossible to control the ship's heading in the rough seas.

Monitor was now in danger of foundering , so Worden signaled Seth Low for help and had Monitor towed to calmer waters closer to shore so she was able to restart her engines later that evening. She rounded Cape Charles around 3:00 pm on 8 March and entered Chesapeake Bay , reaching Hampton Roads at 9:00 pm, well after the first day's fighting in the Battle of Hampton Roads had concluded.

[ 89 ] Battle of Hampton Roads [ edit ] Main article: Battle of Hampton Roads USS Monitor engaging CSS Virginia , 9 March 1862 On 8 March 1862, Virginia , commanded by Commander Franklin Buchanan , [ 90 ] was ready to engage the Union flotilla blockading the James River.

[ g ] Virginia was powered by Merrimack ' s original engines, which had been condemned by the US Navy before her capture. The ship's chief engineer, H. Ashton Ramsay, served in Merrimack before the Civil War broke out and knew of the engines' unreliability, but Buchanan pushed forward undaunted.

[ 92 ] [ h ] The slow-moving Virginia attacked the Union blockading squadron in Hampton Roads, Virginia, destroying the sail frigates Cumberland and Congress .

[ i ] Early in the battle, the steam frigate USS Minnesota ran aground while attempting to engage Virginia , and remained stranded throughout the battle.

Virginia , however, was unable to attack Minnesota before daylight faded. That day Buchanan was severely wounded in the leg and was relieved of command by Catesby ap Roger Jones .

[ 93 ] Days before the battle a telegraph cable was laid between Fortress Monroe, which overlooked Hampton Roads, and Washington.

[ 94 ] Washington was immediately informed of the dire situation after the initial battle. Many were now concerned Virginia would put to sea and begin bombarding cities such as New York while others feared she would ascend the Potomac River and attack Washington.

[ 95 ] In an emergency meeting among President Lincoln, Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton , Secretary Welles and other senior naval officers, inquiries were made about Monitor ' s ability to stop Virginia ' s prospect of further destruction. When the temperamental Stanton learned that Monitor had only two guns, he expressed contempt and rage as he paced back and forth, further increasing the anxiety and despair among attendees of the meeting. Assurances from Admiral Dahlgren and other officers that Virginia was too massive to effectively approach Washington and that Monitor was capable of meeting the challenge gave him no consolation. After further deliberation, Lincoln was finally assured, but Stanton remained almost in a state of terror and sent telegrams to various governors and mayors of the coastal states warning them of the danger.

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] Subsequently, Stanton approved a plan to load some sixty canal boats with stone and gravel and sink them in the Potomac, but Welles was able to convince Lincoln at the last moment that such a plan would only prevent Monitor and other Union ships from reaching Washington and that the barges should only be sunk only if Virginia was able to make her way up the Potomac.

[ 98 ] About 9:00 pm, Monitor finally arrived on the scene, only to discover the destruction that Virginia had already wrought on the Union fleet. Worden was ordered upon reaching Hampton Roads to anchor alongside USS Roanoke and report to Captain John Marston; Worden was briefed on the situation and received further orders to protect the grounded Minnesota .

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] By midnight, under the cover of darkness, Monitor quietly pulled up alongside and behind the Minnesota and waited.

[ 101 ] Duel of the ironclads [ edit ] The next morning at about 6:00 am Virginia , accompanied by Jamestown , Patrick Henry and Teaser , got underway from Sewell's Point to finish off Minnesota and the rest of the blockaders, but were delayed from reaching Hampton Roads because of heavy fog until about 8:00 am.

[ 102 ] In Monitor Worden was already at his station in the pilot house while Greene took command of the turret.

[ 103 ] Samuel Howard, Acting Master of Minnesota , who was familiar with Hampton Roads with its varying depths and shallow areas, had volunteered to be the pilot the night before and thus was accepted, while Quarter Master Peter Williams steered the vessel throughout the battle (Williams was later awarded the Medal of Honor for this act).

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] The speaking tube used to communicate between the pilothouse and the turret broke early in the action, so Keeler and Toffey had to relay commands from Worden to Greene.

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] As Virginia approached, she began firing at Minnesota from more than a mile away, a few of her shells hitting the vessel. When the firing was heard in the distance, Greene sent Keeler to the pilot house for permission to open fire as soon as possible; Worden ordered, [ 103 ] [ 108 ] "Tell Mr. Greene not to fire till I give the word, to be cool and deliberate, to take sure aim and not waste a shot." [ 108 ] Monitor , to the surprise of Virginia ' s crew, emerged from behind Minnesota and positioned herself between her and the grounded ship, preventing the Confederate ironclad from further engaging the vulnerable wooden ship at close range. At 8:45 am Worden gave the order to fire; Greene fired the first shots of the battle between the two ironclads, which harmlessly deflected off the Confederate ironclad. During the battle Monitor fired solid shot, about once every eight minutes, while Virginia fired shell exclusively.

[ 109 ] The ironclads fought, generally at close range, for about four hours, ending at 12:15 pm, [ 110 ] [ j ] ranging from a few yards to more than a hundred. Both ships were constantly in motion, maintaining a circular pattern. Because of Virginia ' s weak engines, great size and weight, and a draft of 22 ft (6.7 m), she was slow and difficult to maneuver, taking her half an hour to complete a 180-degree turn.

[ 112 ] During the engagement, the controls of the machinery driving Monitor ' s turret spindle began to malfunction, making it extremely difficult to turn and stop the turret itself at a given position, so the crew simply let the turret continuously turn and fired their guns "on the fly" as they bore on Virginia .

Monitor received several direct hits on the turret, causing some bolts to violently shear off and ricochet around inside. The deafening sound of the impact stunned some of the crew, causing bleeding from noses and ears.

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] However, neither vessel was able to sink or seriously damage the other. At one point, Virginia attempted to ram, but only struck Monitor a glancing blow and did no damage. The collision did, however, aggravate the damage to Virginia ' s bow from when she had previously rammed Cumberland .

Monitor was also unable to do significant damage to Virginia , possibly because her guns were firing with reduced charges, on advice from Commander John Dahlgren , the gun's designer, who lacked the "preliminary information" needed to determine what amount of charge was needed to "pierce, dislocate or dislodge iron plates" of various thicknesses and configurations.

[ 56 ] [ 115 ] [ k ] During the battle Stodder was stationed at the wheel that controlled the turning of the turret, but at one point when he was leaning against its side the turret received a direct hit directly opposite to him which knocked him clear across the inside, rendering him unconscious. He was taken below to recover and relieved by Stimers.

[ 107 ] [ 116 ] The two vessels were at such close range that they collided five times.

[ 117 ] By 11:00 am Monitor ' s supply of shot in the turret had been exhausted. With one of the gun port covers jammed shut, she hauled off to shallow waters to resupply the turret and repair the damaged hatch, which could not be fixed. During the lull in the battle, Worden climbed through the gun port out onto the deck to get a better view of the overall situation.

Virginia , seeing Monitor turn away, turned her attention to Minnesota and fired shots that set the wooden vessel ablaze, also destroying the nearby tugboat Dragon . When the turret was resupplied with ammunition, Worden returned to battle with only one gun able to fire.

[ 118 ] Towards the end of the engagement, Worden directed Williams to steer Monitor around the stern of the Confederate ironclad; Lieutenant Wood fired Virginia ' s 7-inch Brooke gun at Monitor ' s pilothouse , striking the forward side directly beneath the sight hold, cracking the structural "iron log" along the base of the narrow opening just as Worden was peering out.

[ 119 ] Worden was heard to cry out, My eyes—I am blind!

Others in the pilothouse had also been hit with fragments and were also bleeding.

[ 120 ] Temporarily blinded by shell fragments and gunpowder residue from the explosion, and believing the pilothouse to be severely damaged, Worden ordered Williams to sheer off into shallow water, where Virginia with her deep draft could not follow. There Monitor drifted idly for about twenty minutes.

[ 121 ] At the time the pilothouse was struck, Worden's injury was only known to those in the pilothouse and immediately nearby. With Worden severely wounded, command passed to the executive officer, Samuel Greene . Taken by surprise, he was briefly undecided as to what action to take next, [ 120 ] but after assessing the damage, soon ordered Monitor to return to the battle.

[ 107 ] [ 118 ] [ 122 ] Shortly after Monitor withdrew, Virginia ran aground, at which time Jones came down from the spar deck to find the gun crews not returning fire. Jones demanded to know why and was briefed by Lieutenant Eggleston that powder was low and precious, and given Monitor ' s resistance to shot after two hours of battle, maintained that continued firing at that point would be a waste of ammunition.

[ 26 ] Virginia soon managed to break away and headed back towards Norfolk for needed repairs, believing that Monitor had withdrawn from battle. Greene did not pursue; [ 123 ] like Worden, he was under orders to stay with and protect Minnesota , [ 124 ] an action for which he was later criticized.

As a result of the duel between the two ironclads, Monitor was struck 22 times, including nine hits to the turret and two to the pilothouse. She had managed to fire 41 shots from her pair of Dahlgren guns.

Virginia sustained 97 indentations to her armor from the fire of Monitor and other ships. Neither ship sustained any significant damage. In the opinion of Virginia ' s commander Jones and her other officers, Monitor could have sunk their ship had she hit the vessel at the waterline.

[ 121 ] [ 125 ] Strategically, the battle between these two ships was considered the most definitive naval battle of the Civil War. The battle itself was largely considered a draw, though it could be argued Virginia did slightly more damage.

[ 121 ] Monitor did successfully defend Minnesota and the rest of the Union blockading force, while Virginia was unable to complete the destruction she started the previous day. The battle marked a turning point in the way naval warfare would be fought in the future.

[ 126 ] Strategically, nothing had changed: the Union still controlled Hampton Roads and the Confederates still held several rivers and Norfolk, [ 127 ] making it a strategic victory for the North. The battle of the ironclads led to what was referred to as "Monitor fever" in the North. During the course of the war, improved designs based on Monitor emerged; 60 ironclads were built.

[ 101 ] Events after the battle [ edit ] Officers at right are (left to right): Third Assistant Engineer Robinson W. Hands, Acting Master Louis N. Stodder , Second Assistant Engineer Albert B. Campbell and Acting Volunteer Lieutenant William Flye (with binoculars).

Monitor on the James River , Virginia, 9 July 1862.

Immediately following the battle Stimers telegraphed Ericsson, congratulating and thanking him for making it possible to confront the Confederate ironclad and for "saving the day". No sooner than Monitor had weighed anchor, numerous small boats and spectators on shore flocked around the ship to congratulate the crew for what they regarded as their victory over Virginia . Assistant Secretary Fox, who observed the entire battle from aboard Minnesota , came aboard Monitor and jokingly told her officers, "Well gentlemen, you don't look as though you just went through one of the greatest naval conflicts on record". A small tug soon came alongside and the blinded Worden was brought up from his cabin while crew members and spectators cheered. He was taken to Fort Monroe for preliminary treatment, then to a hospital in Washington.

[ 128 ] Stimers and Newton soon began repairing the damage to the pilot house, and reconfigured the sides from an upright position to a slope of thirty degrees to deflect shot. During this time, Mrs. Worden personally brought news of her husband's progress and recovery and was optimistic, informing the crew his eyesight would soon return but he would be laid up for some time. She also informed them President Lincoln had personally paid Worden a visit extending his gratitude.

[ 129 ] Worden was later taken to his summer home in New York and remained unconscious for three months.

[ 130 ] He returned to Naval service in 1862 as captain of USS Montauk , another Monitor -type ironclad.

The Confederates were also celebrating what they considered a victory, as crowds of spectators gathered along the banks of the Elizabeth River , cheering and waving flags, handkerchiefs and hats as Virginia , displaying the captured ensign of Congress , passed along up the river. The Confederate government was ecstatic and immediately promoted Buchanan to Admiral.

[ 131 ] Both the Union and Confederacy soon came up with plans for defeating the other's ironclad. Oddly, these did not depend on their own ironclads. The Union Navy chartered a large ship (the sidewheeler USS Vanderbilt ) and reinforced her bow with steel specifically to be used as a naval ram , provided Virginia steamed far enough out into Hampton Roads.

[ 132 ] On 11 April, Virginia , accompanied by a number of gunboats, steamed into Hampton Roads to Sewell's Point at the southeast edge, almost over to Newport News , in a challenge to lure Monitor into battle.

Virginia fired a few shots ineffectively at very long range while Monitor returned fire, remaining near Fort Monroe, ready to fight if Virginia came to attack the Federal force congregated there.

[ 133 ] Furthermore, Vanderbilt was in position to ram Virginia if she approached the fort, but Virginia did not take the bait.

[ 134 ] In a further attempt to entice Monitor closer to the Confederate side so she could be boarded, the James River Squadron moved in and captured three merchant ships, the brigs Marcus and Sabout , and the schooner Catherine T. Dix .

[ 135 ] These had been grounded and abandoned when they sighted Virginia entering the Roads. Their flags were then hoisted " Union-side down " to taunt Monitor into a fight as they were towed back to Norfolk. In the end, both sides had failed to provoke a fight on their terms.

[ 136 ] The Confederate Navy originally had devised a plan by which the James River Squadron would swarm Monitor with a party of men to board and capture the vessel, and disable her by using heavy hammers to drive iron wedges under and disable the turret, and by covering the pilothouse with a wet sail effectively blinding the pilot. Others would throw combustibles down the ventilation openings and smoke holes. At one point Jones made such an attempt to board the vessel, but she managed to slip away around the stern of Virginia in time.

[ 118 ] There was a second confrontation on 8 May, when Virginia came out while Monitor and four other Federal ships bombarded Confederate batteries at Sewell's Point. The Federal ships retired slowly to Fort Monroe, hoping to lure Virginia into the Roads. She did not follow, however, and after firing a gun to windward as a sign of contempt, anchored off Sewell's Point. Later, when Confederate forces abandoned Norfolk on 11 May 1862, they were forced to destroy Virginia .

[ 137 ] Battle of Drewry's Bluff [ edit ] Engraving of Battle of Drewry's Bluff Main article: Battle of Drewry's Bluff After the destruction of Virginia , Monitor was free to assist the Union Army and General McClellan's campaign against Richmond. As the Navy always gave command to officers based on seniority, Greene was replaced with Lieutenant Thomas O. Selfridge the day after the battle. Two days later, Selfridge was in turn relieved by Lieutenant William Nicholson Jeffers on 15 May 1862.

[ 138 ] [ 139 ] Monitor was now part of a flotilla under the command of Admiral John Rodgers aboard Galena , and, along with three other gunboats, steamed up the James River and engaged the Confederate batteries at Drewry's Bluff . The force had instructions to coordinate their efforts with McClellan's forces on land and push on towards Richmond to bombard the city into surrender if possible. Without any assistance, the task force got within 8 mi (13 km) of the Confederate capital but could not proceed further because of sunken vessels and debris placed in the river that blocked further passage. There were also artillery batteries at Fort Darling overlooking and guarding the approach, along with other heavy guns and sharpshooters positioned along the river banks. The fort was strategically situated on the west bank of the James River atop of a bluff some 200 ft (61 m) above and overlooking the bend in the river.

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] Monitor was of little help in the assault because the confinement and small gun ports of her turret would not allow her to elevate her guns sufficiently to engage the Confederate batteries at close range, so she had to fall back and fire at a greater distance, [ 140 ] while the other gunboats were unable to overcome the fortifications on their own.

[ 56 ] After Monitor received only a few hits, without incurring any damage, the Confederates, many of whom were former crew members of Virginia well aware of her ability to withstand cannon shot even at close range, [ 141 ] concentrated their guns on the other ships, especially Galena , which sustained considerable damage and moderate casualties.

[ 140 ] After a near four-hour artillery duel and sustaining numerous hits overall, the flotilla was unable to neutralize the fortification and had to turn back.

[ 142 ] Not a single Union ship reached Richmond until near the end of the war, when the city was finally evacuated by the Confederates.

[ 140 ] [ 143 ] 1862 picture of USS Monitor crew; the African American crewman in the right foreground is Siah Carter [ 144 ] After the battle at Drewry's Bluff Monitor remained on the James River providing support, along with the Galena and other gunboats, to McClellan's troops at various points along the river including Harrison's Landing [ 145 ] [ 146 ] which ended in August. However most of the time spent on the river was marked with inactivity and hot weather which had a negative effect on the morale of Monitor ' s crew. During the long, hot, summer, several crew members became sick and were transferred to Hampton Roads while various officers were replaced including Newton, while Jeffers was replaced by Commander Thomas H. Stevens, Jr.

[ l ] on 15 August. By the end of August, Monitor was ordered back to Hampton Roads and dropped anchor nearby the sunken Cumberland at Newport News Point on 30 August, much to the approval of the crew.

Monitor ' s sole purpose now was to blockade the James River from any advances made by the newly constructed Virginia II , an ironclad ram.

[ 145 ] Repairs and refit [ edit ] [Top photo] picture of the Monitor ' s crew; [Bottom Picture] Lieutenant Jeffers, second commander of the Monitor four months after the fight at Hampton Roads in 1862 In September Captain John P. Bankhead received orders to take command of Monitor , relieving Stevens, and was sent to Hampton Roads to take charge of the vessel.

[ 147 ] Shortly after Bankhead assumed command, Monitor ' s engines and boilers were condemned by a board of survey which recommended that they be overhauled completely.

[ 148 ] On 30 September the ironclad was sent to the Washington Navy Yard for repairs [ 149 ] [ 150 ] arriving there on 3 October.

[ 151 ] Upon arrival at Washington Monitor and her crew were greeted by a crowd of thousands of cheering admirers who came to see the ship that "saved the nation".

Monitor was now a premier tourist attraction and the crowd was soon allowed on board to tour the vessel.

[ 152 ] During this time the vessel was picked clean of artifacts for souvenirs by the touring civilians that came aboard. When Stodder and others came to close up the dock and ship one evening Stodder noted, "When we came up to clean that night there was not a key, doorknob, escutcheon – there wasn't a thing that hadn't been carried away." [ 153 ] Before Monitor was put into dry dock for repairs, Lincoln, Fox, various officials and a few of Worden's close friends arrived to ceremoniously review the vessel and pay respect to the crew and former commander Worden, who after a long and partial recovery arrived for the occasion. Entire army regiments were also directed to come by the navy yard and review the ship and honor the crew.

Monitor ' s crew assembled on deck in formation with their officers in front, while Lincoln, Fox and other guests stood near the turret. When Worden, with part of his face blackened from the wounds he received at Hampton Roads, came aboard, the heavy guns in the navy yard were fired in salute . Lincoln came forward and greeted Worden and then introduced him to some of the others. After his formal greeting the crew swarmed around Worden and embraced and shook hands with their former commander and thanked God for his recovery and return. Worden called each of them by name and spoke friendly to and complimented each of them personally. When order was restored the President gave a short speech about Worden's career. At Fox's request, Worden gave a speech to the gathering about his voyage from New York to Hampton Roads, the trials they were faced with along the way and of the great battle between Monitor and Virginia , while paying tribute to many of the officers and men involved. In closing he gave special thanks to Ericsson, Lincoln, Welles and all who made construction of Monitor possible.

[ 154 ] [ 155 ] While Monitor was undergoing repairs her crew was put aboard USS King Philip and were eventually granted a furlough by Bankhead who himself went on leave.

[ 156 ] For approximately six weeks the vessel remained in dry dock while her bottom was scraped clean, the engines and boilers were overhauled, the entire vessel was cleaned and painted, and a number of improvements made, including an iron shield around the top of the turret.

[ 147 ] To make the vessel more seaworthy, a 30-foot (9 m) funnel-shaped smokestack was placed over the smoke outlet while taller fresh air vents were installed. The berth deck below was also enlarged and raised by removing some of the side storerooms and placing them below, thus reducing the height of the interior which now barely allowed the crew to stand upright. Several cranes were also added while interior improvements were made making the confining environment more livable. A large blower that operated with its own engine was installed which drew fresh air down through the pilothouse. During this time the two Dahlgren guns were each engraved with large letters, MONITOR & MERRIMAC – WORDEN and MONITOR & MERRIMAC – ERICSSON , respectively.

[ m ] Additional iron plates were installed covering the dents from the previous battles. Each plate was inscribed with the name of the source from where the shell causing the dent was made. i.e.

Merrimack, Fort Darling , etc.

[ 154 ] [ 157 ] Stanchions were also installed around the perimeter of the freeboard with a rope strung through each making it safer to walk about the deck amid stormy weather and rough seas.

[ 154 ] Monitor was finally taken out of dry dock on 26 October. By November the ship was fully repaired and ready to return to service.

[ 147 ] [ 158 ] Final voyage [ edit ] Engraving of USS Monitor sinking, with USS Rhode Island in the background On 24 December 1862, orders were issued directing Monitor to Beaufort, North Carolina to join USS Passaic and USS Montauk for a joint Army-Navy expedition against Wilmington, North Carolina, where she would join the blockade off Charleston . The orders were received by the crew on Christmas Day, some of whom had been aboard Monitor on her harrowing journey from New York to Hampton Roads in March and were not pleased with the prospect of taking to the high seas once again. Dana Greene remarked, "I do not consider this steamer a sea going vessel".

[ 159 ] The crew celebrated Christmas aboard Monitor while berthed at Hampton Roads in what was described as a most merry fashion, while many other celebrations were occurring along the shore. The ship's cook was paid one dollar to prepare a meal for the crew befitting the day; it was received with mixed opinion. That day, Monitor was made ready for sea, her crew under strict orders not to discuss the impending voyage with anyone, but bad weather delayed her departure until 29 December.

[ 160 ] While the design of Monitor was well-suited for river combat, her low freeboard and heavy turret made her highly unseaworthy in rough waters. Under the command of John P. Bankhead , Monitor put to sea on 31 December, under tow from the steamship USS Rhode Island , as a heavy storm developed off Cape Hatteras, North Carolina . Using chalk and a blackboard, Bankhead wrote messages alerting Rhode Island that if Monitor needed help she would signal with a red lantern.

[ 161 ] Monitor was soon in trouble as the storm increased in ferocity. Large waves were splashing over and completely covering the deck and pilot house so the crew temporarily rigged the wheel atop the turret which was manned by helmsman Francis Butts.

[ 162 ] Water continued flooding into the vents and ports and the ship began rolling uncontrollably in the high seas. Sometimes she would drop into a wave with such force the entire hull would tremble. Leaks were beginning to appear everywhere. Bankhead ordered the engineers to start the Worthington pumps , which temporarily stemmed the rising waters, but soon Monitor was hit by a squall and a series of violent waves and water continued to work its way into the vessel. Right when the Worthington pump could no longer keep pace with the flooding, a call came from the engine room that water was gaining there. Realizing the ship was in serious trouble, Bankhead signaled Rhode Island for help and hoisted the red lantern next to Monitor ' s white running light atop the turret. He then ordered the anchor dropped to stop the ship's rolling and pitching with little effect, making it no easier for the rescue boats to get close enough to receive her crew. He then ordered the towline cut and called for volunteers, [ 163 ] Stodder, along with crewmates John Stocking, [ 164 ] and James Fenwick volunteered and climbed down from the turret, but eyewitnesses said that as soon as they were on the deck Fenwick and Stocking were quickly swept overboard and drowned. Stodder managed to hang onto the safety lines around the deck and finally cut through the 13 in (33 cm) towline with a hatchet.

[ 165 ] At 11:30 pm. Bankhead ordered the engineers to stop engines and divert all available steam to the large Adams centrifugal steam pump ; [ 166 ] but with reduced steam output from a boiler being fed wet coal, it too was unable to stem the rapidly rising water.

[ 167 ] [ 168 ] After all of the steam pumps had failed, Bankhead ordered some of the crew to man the hand pumps and organized a bucket brigade , but to no avail.

[ 145 ] Greene and Stodder were among the last men to abandon ship and remained with Bankhead who was the last surviving man to abandon the sinking Monitor . In his official report of Monitor to the Navy Department, Bankhead praised Greene and Stodder for their heroic efforts and wrote, "I would beg leave to call the attention of the Admiral and of the Department of the particularly good conduct of Lieutenant Greene and Acting Master Louis N. Stodder, who remained with me until the last, and by their example did much toward inspiring confidence and obedience on the part of the others." [ 83 ] After a frantic rescue effort, Monitor finally capsized and sank, stern first, [ 169 ] approximately 16 miles (26 km) southeast off Cape Hatteras with the loss of sixteen men, [ 170 ] including four officers, some of whom remained in the turret, which detached as the ship capsized. Forty-seven men were rescued by the life boats from Rhode Island .

[ 171 ] [ 172 ] [ n ] Bankhead, Greene and Stodder barely managed to get clear of the sinking vessel and survived the ordeal, [ 166 ] but suffered from exposure from the icy winter sea.

[ 173 ] After his initial recovery, Bankhead filed his official report, as did the commanding officers of the Rhode Island , stating officers and men of both Monitor and Rhode Island did everything within their ability to keep Monitor from sinking. The Navy did not find it necessary to commission a board of inquiry to investigate the affair and took no action against Bankhead or any of his officers.

[ 174 ] Some time later a controversy emerged over why Monitor sank. In the Army and Navy Journal , Ericsson accused the crew of drunkenness during the storm, being consequently unable to prevent the vessel from sinking. Stodder vigorously defended the crew and rebuked Ericsson's characterization of the crew and events and wrote to Pierce that Ericsson "covers up defects by blaming those that are now dead", pointing out that there were a number of unavoidable events and circumstances that led to the ship's sinking, foremost being the overhang between the upper and lower hulls which came loose and partially separated during the storm from slamming into the violent waves. Stodder's account was corroborated by other shipmates.

[ 175 ] Rediscovery [ edit ] The Navy tested an "underwater locator" in August 1949 by searching an area south of the Cape Hatteras Lighthouse for the wreck of Monitor . It found a 140-foot (42.7 m) long object bulky enough to be a shipwreck, in 310 feet (94.5 m) of water that was thought to be Monitor , but powerful currents negated attempts by divers to investigate.

[ 176 ] Retired Rear Admiral Edward Ellsberg proposed using external pontoons to raise the wreck in 1951, the same method of marine salvage he had used on the sunken submarine S-51 , for the cost of $250,000.

[ 177 ] Four years later, Robert F. Marx claimed to have discovered the wreck based on the idea she had drifted into shallow water north of the lighthouse before sinking. Marx said he had dived on the wreck and placed a Coke bottle with his name on it in one of the gun barrels, although he never provided any proof of his story.

[ 178 ] Monitor ' s anchor at the Mariners' Museum Interest in locating the ship revived in the early 1970s and Duke University , the National Geographic Society and the National Science Foundation sponsored an expedition in August 1973 to search for the wreck using a towed sonar system. The Duke team was led by John G. Newton [ 179 ] (no known relation to the Isaac Newton that served on the Monitor ). On 27 August, Monitor was discovered almost 111 years after sinking, near Cape Hatteras at 230 feet (70 m) depth at coordinates 35°0′6″N 75°24′23″W ﻿ / ﻿ 35.00167°N 75.40639°W ﻿ / 35.00167; -75.40639 . They sent a camera down to photograph the wreck, but the pictures were so fuzzy as to be useless; on a second attempt the camera snagged something on the wreck and was lost. The sonar images did not match what they expected the wreck to look like until they realized that the sinking vessel had turned over while descending and was resting at the bottom upside down. The team announced their discovery on 8 March 1974. Another expedition was mounted that same month to confirm the discovery and the research submersible Alcoa Sea Probe was able to take still photos and video of the wreck that confirmed it was Monitor .

[ 180 ] [ 181 ] These photos revealed that the wreck was disintegrating and the discovery raised another issue. Since the Navy had formally abandoned the wreck in 1953, it could be exploited by divers and private salvage companies as it lay outside North Carolina's territorial limits.

[ o ] To preserve the ship, the wreck, and everything around it, a .5- nautical-mile (0.93 km; 0.58 mi) radius was designated as the Monitor National Marine Sanctuary , the first U.S.

marine sanctuary , on 30 January 1975.

[ 183 ] Monitor was also designated a National Historic Landmark on 23 June 1986.

[ 184 ] In 1977, scientists were finally able to view the wreckage in person as the submersible Johnson Sea Link was used to inspect it. The Sea Link was able to ferry divers down to the sunken vessel and retrieve small artifacts.

[ 185 ] U.S. Navy interest in raising the entire ship ended in 1978 when Captain Willard F. Searle Jr.

calculated the cost and possible damage expected from the operation: $20 million to stabilize the vessel in place, or as much as $50 million to bring all of it to the surface.

[ 186 ] Research continued and artifacts continued to be recovered, including the ship's 1,500-pound (680 kg) anchor in 1983. The growing number of relics required conservation and a proper home so the U.S.

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), in charge of all U.S. marine sanctuaries, selected the Mariners' Museum on 9 March 1987 after considering proposals from several other institutions.

[ 187 ] [ 188 ] Recovery [ edit ] Replica of Monitor ' s turret in the Mariners' Museum as it was recovered Initial efforts in 1995 by Navy and NOAA divers to raise the warship's propeller were foiled by an abnormally stormy season off Cape Hatteras. Realizing that raising the whole wreck was impractical for financial reasons as well as the inability to bring up the wreck intact, NOAA developed a comprehensive plan to recover the most significant parts of the ship, namely her engine, propeller, guns, and turret. It estimated that the plan would cost over 20 million dollars to implement over four years. The Department of Defense Legacy Resource Management Program contributed $14.5 million. The Navy divers, mainly from its two Mobile Diving and Salvage Units , would perform the bulk of the work necessary in order to train in deep sea conditions and evaluate new equipment.

[ 189 ] Another effort to raise Monitor ' s propeller was successful on 8 June 1998, although the amount of effort required to work in the difficult conditions off Cape Hatteras was underestimated and the fewer than 30 divers used were nearly overwhelmed. The 1999 dive season was mostly research oriented as divers investigated the wreck in detail, planning how to recover the engine and determining if they could stabilize the hull so that it would not collapse onto the turret. In 2000, the divers shored up the port side of the hull with bags of grout , installed the engine recovery system, an external framework to which the engine would be attached, in preparation for the next season, and made over five times as many dives as they had the previous season.

[ 190 ] The 2001 dive season concentrated on raising the ship's steam engine and condenser . Hull plates had to be removed to access the engine compartment and both the engine and the condenser had to be separated from the ship, the surrounding wreckage and each other. A Mini Rover ROV was used to provide visibility of the wreck and divers to the support staff above water. The engine was raised on 16 July and the condenser three days later by the crane barge Wotan .

Saturation diving was evaluated by the Navy that dive season on Monitor and proved to be very successful, allowing divers to maximize their time on the bottom.

[ 191 ] The surface-supplied divers evaluated the use of heliox due to the depth of the wreck. It also proved to be successful once the dive tables were adjusted.

[ 192 ] A Navy diver prepares "the spider" LEFT: The turret, moments after it reached the surface, secure in the "spider" lifting frame.

RIGHT: The turret is loaded onto the crane barge Wotan .

A diver examines the wreck in 2016.

A diver shines a light at the wreck.

Much like the previous year, the 2002 dive season was dedicated to lifting the 120-long-ton (120 t) turret to the surface. Around 160 divers were assigned to remove the parts of the hull, including the armor belt, that lay on top of the turret using chisels, exothermic cutting torches and 20,000 psi (140 MPa; 1,410 kg/cm 2 ) hydroblasters . They removed as much of the debris from inside the turret as possible to reduce the weight to be lifted. This was usually concreted coal as one of the ship's coal bunkers had ruptured and dumped most of its contents into the turret. The divers prepared the turret roof for the first stage of the lift by excavating underneath the turret and placed steel beams and angle irons to reinforce it for its move onto a lifting platform for the second stage. A large, eight-legged lifting frame, nicknamed the "spider", was carefully positioned over the turret to move it onto the platform and the entire affair would be lifted by the crane mounted on the Wotan . The divers discovered one skeleton in the turret on 26 July before the lift and spent a week carefully chipping about half of it free of the concreted debris; the other half was inaccessible underneath the rear of one of the guns.

[ 193 ] With Tropical Storm Cristobal bearing down on the recovery team, and time and money running out, [ 194 ] the team made the decision to raise the turret on 5 August 2002, after 41 days of work, and the gun turret broke the surface at 5:30 pm to the cheers of everyone aboard Wotan and other recovery ships nearby.

[ 195 ] As archaeologists examined the contents of the turret after it had been landed aboard Wotan , they discovered a second skeleton, but removing it did not begin until the turret arrived at the Mariners' Museum for conservation. The remains of these sailors were transferred to the Joint POW/MIA Accounting Command (JPAC) at Hickam Air Force Base , Hawaii, in the hope that they could be identified.

[ 196 ] Only 16 of the crew were not rescued by Rhode Island before Monitor sank and the forensic anthropologists at JPAC were able to rule out the three missing black crewmen based on the shape of the femurs and skulls.

[ 197 ] Among the most promising of the 16 candidates were crew members Jacob Nicklis, Robert Williams and William Bryan, [ 198 ] [ 199 ] [ 200 ] [ 201 ] but a decade passed without their identities being discovered. On 8 March 2013 their remains were buried at Arlington National Cemetery with full military honors.

[ 202 ] In 2003 NOAA divers and volunteers returned to the Monitor with the goal of obtaining overall video of the site to create a permanent record of the current conditions on the wreck after the turret recovery. Jeff Johnston of the Monitor National Marine Sanctuary (MNMS) also wanted a definitive image of the vessel's pilothouse. During the dives, Monitor ' s iron pilothouse was located near the bow of the vessel and documented for the first time by videographer Rick Allen, of Nautilus Productions , in its inverted position.

[ 203 ] Conservation of the propeller was completed nearly three years after its recovery, and it is on display in the Monitor Center at the Mariners' Museum.

[ 204 ] As of 2013, conservation of the engine, its components, the turret and the guns continues.

[ 205 ] The Dahlgren guns were removed from the turret in September 2004 and placed in their own conservation tanks.

[ 206 ] Among some of the artifacts recovered from the sunken vessel was a red signal lantern, possibly the one used to send a distress signal to Rhode Island and the last thing to be seen before Monitor sank in 1862 – it was the first object recovered from the site in 1977. A gold wedding band was also recovered from the hand of the skeletal remains of one of Monitor ' s crew members found in the turret.

[ 207 ] Northrop Grumman Shipyard in Newport News constructed a full-scale non-seaworthy static replica of Monitor . The replica was laid down in February 2005 and completed just two months later on the grounds of the Mariners' Museum.

[ 208 ] The Monitor National Marine Sanctuary conducts occasional dives on the wreck to monitor and record any changes in its condition and its environment.

[ 209 ] Memorials [ edit ] LEFT: The funeral procession for the two unidentified Monitor sailors at Arlington National Cemetery in Arlington, Virginia , on March 8, 2013.

RIGHT: The USS Monitor Memorial at Arlington National Cemetery marks the grave of the two unknowns.

The Greenpoint Monitor Monument in McGolrick Park , Brooklyn , depicts a sailor from Monitor pulling on a capstan . The sculptor Antonio de Filippo was commissioned by the State of New York in the 1930s for a bronze statue to commemorate the Battle of Hampton Roads, John Ericsson, and the crew of the ship. It was dedicated on 6 November 1938.

[ 210 ] A vandal doused it with white paint on 7 January 2013.

[ 211 ] In 1995 the U.S. Postal Service issued a stamp commemorating USS Monitor and CSS Virginia depicting the two ships while engaged in their famous battle at Hampton Roads. For an image of the stamp, see footnote link.

[ 212 ] The 150th anniversary of the ship's loss prompted several events in commemoration. A memorial to Monitor and her lost crew members was erected in the Civil War section of Hampton National Cemetery by NOAA's Office of National Marine Sanctuaries , together with the U.S. Navy and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs , and dedicated on 29 December 2012.

[ 213 ] The Greenpoint Monitor Museum commemorated the ship and her crew with an event on 12 January 2013 at the grave sites of those Monitor crew members buried in Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn, followed by a service in the cemetery's chapel.

[ 214 ] New Jersey–based indie rock band Titus Andronicus named their critically acclaimed [ 215 ] [ 216 ] second album, 2010's The Monitor , for the ship. Featured on the album's sleeve are the crewmen of Monitor , taken from a tintype portrait. The album's interwoven references to the Civil War include speeches and writings from the period, as well as the side-long closing track "The Battle of Hampton Roads". The latter refers to the Monitor ' s encounter with CSS Virginia in prominent detail. Singer/guitarist Patrick Stickles commented while making the album that he was inspired by Ken Burns 's The Civil War and the ship itself so much that he decided to name Titus Andronicus's second album in its honor.

[ 217 ] Legacy [ edit ] See also: Monitor (warship) Monitor gave her name to a new type of mastless , low-freeboard warship that mounted its armament in turrets. Many more were built, including river monitors , and they played key roles in Civil War battles on the Mississippi and James Rivers. The breastwork monitor was developed during the 1860s by Sir Edward Reed , Chief Constructor of the Royal Navy , as an improvement of the basic Monitor design. Reed gave these ships a superstructure to increase seaworthiness and raise the freeboard of the gun turrets so they could be worked in all weathers. The superstructure was armored to protect the bases of the turrets, the funnels and the ventilator ducts in what he termed a breastwork . The ships were conceived as harbor defense ships with little need to leave port. Reed took advantage of the lack of masts and designed the ships with one twin-gun turret at each end of the superstructure, each able to turn and fire in a 270° arc.

[ 218 ] These ships were described by Admiral George Alexander Ballard as being like "full-armoured knights riding on donkeys, easy to avoid but bad to close with".

[ 219 ] Reed later developed the design into the Devastation class , the first ocean-going turret ships without masts, the direct ancestors of the pre-dreadnought battleships and the dreadnoughts .

[ 220 ] In popular culture [ edit ] The battle between the Monitor and the Confederate ironclad CSS Virginia was reenacted using scale models in the 1936 film Hearts in Bondage from Republic Pictures .

[ 221 ] The battle was also dramatized in the 1991 made-for-television movie Ironclads , produced by Ted Turner .

[ 222 ] The ship was also mentioned in the book True history of the Kelly gang and would later be shown in the film adaptation of the book. It is framed as Ned’s inspiration for designing the armour.

See also [ edit ] American Civil War portal Bibliography of American Civil War naval history Bibliography of early United States naval history List of monitors of the United States Navy List of National Historic Landmarks in North Carolina National Register of Historic Places listings in Dare County, North Carolina Notes [ edit ] ^ The first ironclad warship commissioned by the United States was the wooden-hulled City-class ironclad USS Carondelet commissioned on 15 January 1862. She was manned by Union Navy officers and enlisted personnel and supervised by the United States Department of the Navy , but the construction of the Western Gunboat Flotilla in the Western Theater was funded by the U.S. War Department , and at her commissioning the Carondelet was Union Army (United States Army) owned, rather than U.S. Navy property.

[ 2 ] ^ Accounts vary. Some sources claim she stole and was carrying the ship's plans, rather than a letter from a third party.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] ^ Members of the Ironclad board included Commodores Joseph Smith , Hiram Paulding and Charles H. Davis . The board lacked experienced shipbuilders but was compensated by the fact that two of the members had years of shipyard experience.

[ 15 ] ^ British trials of a turret designed by Captain Cowper Coles on board the floating battery HMS Trusty began the same month.

[ 21 ] ^ Ericsson later admitted that this was a serious flaw in the ship's design and that the pilot house should have been placed atop the turret.

^ See Bibliography: Marvel, William, ed. (2000).

The Monitor Chronicles: One Sailor's Account ...

^ Buchanan was commander of the Washington Navy Yard when the war broke out.

[ 91 ] ^ Before setting out to engage the Union blockade Buchanan had quizzed Ramsay and learned of the history of their questionable reliability.

[ 92 ] ^ Serving aboard Congress was Buchanan's brother, McKean Buchanan.

[ 90 ] ^ Accounts vary, some claim the battle lasted no more than three and a half hours, [ 26 ] while some claim as many as five hours.

[ 111 ] ^ In a letter of 19 March 1862, to Captain A. A. Harwood, Chief of Bureau of Ordnance and hydrography, Dahlgren emphasized "A subject so important cannot be perfected without much reflection and extensive experiment. But we lack almost the preliminary information indispensable to commence with." [ 115 ] ^ Stevens previously served as commander of USS Maratanza .

[ 145 ] ^ In the actual engravings the men's names are inscribed below those of the ships' names. e.g. MONITOR & MERRIMA WORDEN ^ William Keeler in Annual Report of the Secretary of the Navy, (Washington: D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1863) ^ "Research and case law in the 1970s and 1980s determined that the U.S. Navy abandonment of the USS Monitor consisted only of striking the vessel from the Navy List , an action more accurately described as a decision to 'surplus' ships, not a legal abandonment of the warship as an item of federal property. In fact, aside from express authority from Congress, the act of abandonment is outside the authority of any agency, including the Navy. The Navy can decommission a ship, but must follow 'surplus property' procedures administered by the General Services Administration to actually dispose of the ship." [ 182 ] References [ edit ] ^ "National Register Information System" .

National Register of Historic Places .

National Park Service . 9 July 2010.

^ Silverstone, 2006 , pp. 109, 112.

^ Bennett, 1900 , pp. 212–213.

^ Baxter, 1933 , pp. 3–9.

^ a b Gardiner, 1992 , pp. 50–55.

^ Konstam, 2002 , p. 12.

^ Bennett, 1900 , p. 64.

^ Baxter, 1933 , pp. 184–185.

^ Clancy, 2013 , p. 55.

^ CIA: Historical Document: Black Dispatches .

^ Davis, 1996 , pp. 214–215.

^ Sutherland, 2004 , p. 70.

^ a b Allen, 2008 , pp. 115–116.

^ a b Tomblin, 2009 , p. 161 ^ a b Roberts, 1999 , p. 5 ^ Roberts, 1999 , p. 7 ^ Baxter, 1933 , p. 253 ^ a b Thompson, 1990 , p. 224 ^ a b Ward, Burns and Burns, 1990 , p. 99 ^ Roberts, 1999 , pp. 7, 16–17 ^ Brown, pp. 41–43 ^ Roberts, 1999 , pp. 7–11 ^ Thulesius, 2007 , pp. 108, 113 ^ Bushnell, Ericsson, Welles, 1899 , pp. 17, 41 ^ McCordock, 1938 , p. 103 ^ a b c Tucker, 2006 , p. 171 ^ a b c d Thompson, 1990 , p. 228.

^ a b Silverstone , p. 4 ^ a b c Campbell, 1979 , p. 119 ^ Broadwater, 2012 , p. 128 ^ Canney, 1993 , p. 30 ^ Thompson, 1990 , p. 227 ^ Mindell, 2000 , p. 41 ^ McCordock, 1938 , p. 31 ^ Thompson, 1990 , p. 226 ^ Canney, 1993 , pp. 30, 80 ^ a b c Thompson, 1990 , p. 225.

^ Baxter, 1933 , p. 256 ^ Canney, 1993 , pp. 79–80 ^ Reed, 1869 , pp. 253–54.

^ Broadwater, 2012 , p. 8 ^ Wilson, 1896 , p. 30.

^ Clancy, 2013 , pp. 211–212 ^ Field, 2011 , p. 33 ^ Olmstead, Stark & Spencer, 1997 , p. 90 ^ Canney, 1993 , p. 29 ^ Rawson, 1898 , pp. 285–86.

^ Rawson, 1898 , pp. 293–94 ^ Garrison, 1994 , p. 140 ^ Gentile, 1993 , p. 70 ^ Baxter, 1968 , pp. 258–59 ^ McPherson, 1988 , pp. 374–375 ^ a b McPherson, 1988 , p. 375 ^ Baxter, 1968 , pp. 257–259 ^ Thompson, 1990 , pp. 229, 234–237 ^ a b c Nelson, 2009 p. 467 ^ Quarstein, 2010 , p. 25 ^ a b Thulesius, 2007 , p. 109 ^ Bennett, 1900 , p. 79 ^ Quarstein, 2010 , p. 34 ^ Thompson, 1990 , pp. 236–237 ^ Mariners' Museum article, 2013 ^ Quarstein, 1999 , p. 47 ^ a b Thompson, 1990 , p. 237 ^ DANFS: Monitor ^ Bennett, 1900 , p. 119 ^ Clancy, 2013 , pp. 27–28 ^ Clancy, 2013 , pp. 30–31 ^ Quarstein, 2010 , p. 46 ^ Park, 2007 , p. 193 ^ Quarstein, 2006 , p. 45 ^ Quarstein, 2006 , p. 85 ^ Thulesius, 2007 , p. 140 ^ a b Quarstein, 2010 , p. 40 ^ a b Quarstein, 2010 , pp. 40–41 ^ Konstam, 2002 , p. 68 ^ Rawson and Woods, 1897 , p. 534 ^ "Navy Photograph NH # 61931" .

Archived from the original on 16 November 2022 . Retrieved 9 March 2019 .

^ "Navy Photograph NH# 575" .

Archived from the original on 16 November 2022 . Retrieved 9 March 2019 .

^ Quarstein, 2010 , p. 44 ^ Quarstein, 2010 , p. 50 ^ George S. Geer, 1862, letters to wife Martha ^ a b Still, 1988 , p. 20 ^ Thulesius, 2007 , p. 138 ^ Baxter, 1968 , pp. 266, 286 ^ a b Konstam, 2002 , p. 40 ^ Baxter, 1968 , p. 167 ^ Baxter, 1968 , p. 289 ^ Clancy, 2013 , pp. 54–57, 74 ^ a b Davis, 1996 , p. 216 ^ Holzer, Mulligan, 2006 , p. 70 ^ a b Nelson, 2009 , p. 6 ^ Konstam, 2002 , p. 13 ^ Clancy, 2013 , p. 60 ^ Quarstein, 1999 , p. 75 ^ Baxter, 1933 , p. 297 ^ Welles Diary , Vol. I, p. 65 ^ Welles Diary , Vol. I, p. 66 ^ Quarstein, 1999 , p. 77 ^ Field, 2011 , p. 44 ^ a b Wagner, 2002 , p. 553 ^ Quarstein, 1999 , p. 78 ^ a b Still, 1988 , p. 18 ^ Field, 2011 , pp. 38, 46 ^ Quarstein, 2010 , pp. 181, 191 ^ Quarstein, 2010 , p. 78 ^ a b c Greene letter, 1862 ^ a b Hoehling, 1993 , p. 155 ^ Maclay, 1894 , p. 314 ^ Ward, Burns and Burns, 1990 , pp. 95, 101 ^ Varhola, 1999 , p. 221 ^ McPherson, 1988 , pp. 373–74 ^ Clancy, 2013 , pp. 109–111 ^ Leckie, 1990 , p. 211 ^ a b Dahlgren, 1882 , p. 279 ^ Maclay, 1894 , p. 313 ^ Ward, Burns and Burns, 1990 , p. 101 ^ a b c Field, 2011 , p. 56 ^ Field, 2011 , pp. 36–37, 56–57 ^ a b Holzer, Mulligan, 2006 , p. 14 ^ a b c Wilson, 1896 , p. 32 ^ Baxter, 1933 , p. 294 ^ Still, 1988 , p. 7 ^ Holzer, Mulligan, 2006 , p. 101 ^ Quarstein, 2010 , p. 79 ^ Konstam, 2002 , p. 7 ^ Davis, 1975 , p. 136 ^ Quarstein, 2010 , p. 71 ^ Quarstein, 2010 , p. 97 ^ Still, 1988 , p. 8 ^ Quarstein, 2012 , p. 169 ^ Quarstein, 2010 , p. 108 ^ Bennett, 1900 , pp. 136–137 ^ Broadwater, 2012 , p. 88 ^ Quarstein, 2010 , p. 109 ^ Anderson, 1989 , pp. 77–78 ^ Quarstein, 2012 , p. 15 ^ Davis, 1975 , p. 147 ^ a b Fuller, 2008 , p. 178 ^ a b c d Stern, 1962 , p. 90 ^ McCordock, 1938 , p. 349 ^ Wagner, Galleghar, Finkelman, 2002 , p. 530 ^ Wagner, Galleghar, Finkelman, 2002 , p. 574 ^ "Navsource archives" . Retrieved 9 March 2019 .

^ a b c d Quarstein, 2010 , pp. 149–150 ^ Tucker, 2006 , p. 182 ^ a b c Mariener's Museum, 2013: John P. Bankhead ^ Still, 1988 , p. 67 ^ Quarstein, 2006 , p. 140 ^ Thulesius, 2007 , p. 131 ^ Quarstein, 2006 , p. 241 ^ Quarstein, 2010 , pp. 155–156 ^ Quarstein, 2006 , p. 241 ^ a b c Nelson, 2009 , p. 323 ^ Worden, Greene, 1912 , pp. 1–6, 21–22 ^ Quarstein, 2010 , p. 156 ^ Quarstein, 2010 , pp. 156–157 ^ Still, 1988 , p. 67 ^ Quarstein, 1999 , p. 121 ^ Quarstein, 2010 , p. 106 ^ Quarstein, 2010 , p. 171 ^ Thulesius, 2007 , p. 136 ^ Quarstein, 2010 , p. 172 ^ His real name was Wells Wentz; see US Naval Institute Magazine 2013 Archived 16 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine -thus he is listed under his real name in the USS Monitor Cenotaph memorial gravestone ^ Mariner's Museum, Article: The Last Voyage of the USS Monitor ^ a b Mariner's Museum, Article: Last Voyage ^ Quarstein, 2010 , pp. 171–72; ^ Broadwater, 2012 , p. 13 ^ "The Lost Men of the Monitor" . May 2013.

^ "USS Monitor" .

monitor.noaa.gov . Monitor National Marine Sanctuary . Retrieved 3 July 2019 .

In the end, 16 of the brave men onboard the Monitor never met the year of 1863.

^ Broadwater, 2012 , p. 12 ^ Holloway, 2013 , pp. 7–8 ^ Mariner's Museum, Article: John P. Bankhead, 2013 ^ Broadwater, 2012 , p. 14 ^ Mindell, 2000 , p. 140 ^ Clancy, 2013 , p. 32 ^ Harvard Journal, April 1951 ^ Clancy, 2013 , pp. 32–33 ^ "Monitor 150th Anniversary – Discovery of the Monitor" .

^ Clancy, 2013 , pp. 34–37 ^ "Getting a Clear View of the USS Monitor" .

sanctuaries.noaa.gov . Retrieved 1 June 2024 .

^ Broadwater, 2012 , p. 62 ^ Clancy, 2013 , pp. 37–38 ^ Broadwater, 2012 , p. 91 ^ Clancy, 2013 , pp. 38–40 ^ Erickson, 1998 , part 5 of 5, p. 2 ^ Clancy, 2013 , pp. 42–43 ^ Broadwater, John.

"The USS Monitor: In Situ Preservation and Recovery" .

academia.edu . Retrieved 8 April 2016 .

^ Clancy, 2013 , pp. 44–48 ^ Clancy, 2013 , pp. 48–50 ^ Broadwater, 2012 , pp. 156–62 ^ Southerland; Davidson; Journal, 2001 ^ Clancy, 2013 , pp. 63, 102, 120, 186, 210 ^ Clancy, 2013 , pp. 212–13, 230 ^ Broadwater, 2012 , p. 183 ^ Clancy, 2013 , pp. 265–67, 277–79 ^ Clancy, 2013 , pp. 279–84 ^ Smolenyak, Megan (28 December 2012).

"150th Anniversary of the USS Monitor: Meet Civil War Naval Heroes Robert Williams and William Bryan" .

HuffPost . Retrieved 16 January 2013 .

^ Smolenyak, Megan (26 December 2012).

"Crew of the USS Monitor: Could Sailor Jacob Nicklis Be One of the Mystery Skeletons?" .

HuffPost . Retrieved 16 January 2013 .

^ Smolenyak, Megan (13 May 2012).

"Crew Members of the USS Monitor: Solving the Mystery of the Skeletons in the Turret 150 Years Later" .

HuffPost . Retrieved 16 January 2013 .

^ Smolenyak, Megan (9 November 2011).

"USS Monitor: Could William Bryan Be One of the Skeletons in the Turret?" .

HuffPost . Retrieved 16 January 2013 .

^ "Civil War sailors laid to rest 150 years later" . CNN. 8 March 2013 . Retrieved 8 March 2013 .

^ " Monitor Expedition 2003" .

NOAA . 26 July 2003.

^ Broadwater, 2012 , p. 133 ^ "USS Monitor Center" . The Mariners' Museum. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014 . Retrieved 4 July 2013 .

^ Clancy, 2013 , p. 271 ^ NOAA: Monitor's Artifacts ^ Northrop Grumman Newport News.

"Northrop Grumman Employees Reconstruct History with USS Monitor Replica" . Archived from the original on 19 February 2007 . Retrieved 21 May 2007 .

^ "About Your Sanctuary: Expeditions" . Monitor National Marine Sanctuary . Retrieved 4 July 2013 .

^ "Monitor Memorial: History" . City of New York: Parks & Recreation . Retrieved 4 July 2013 .

^ Calder, Rich (7 January 2013).

"Vandal covers B'klyn Civil War statue in white paint" .

New York Post . NYP Holdings . Retrieved 4 July 2013 .

^ Smithsonian National Postal Museum . An image of the stamp is available at Arago: people, postage & the post online, Monitor*Virginia stamp .

^ Ricles, Shannon.

"USS Monitor Monument Dedication" .

USS Monitor: Preserving a Legacy . Monitor National Marine Sanctuary . Retrieved 4 July 2013 .

^ "The Greenpoint Monitor Museum" . The Greenpoint Monitor Museum . Retrieved 4 July 2013 .

^ "Robert Christgau: CG: Titus Andronicus" .

robertchristgau.com .

^ Lymangrover, Jason.

"The Monitor – Titus Andronicus" . AllMusic.

^ "Titus Andronicus- The Making of the Monitor Pt 1" . 12 July 2010. Archived from the original on 26 October 2013 – via YouTube.

^ Parkes, 1990 , p. 166 ^ Ballard, 1980 , p. 219 ^ Chesneau & Kolesnik, 1979 , p. 23 ^ Erickson, Hal (2020).

"Hearts in Bondage (1936)" .

AllMovie . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ Wills, Brian Steel (2011).

Gone with the Glory: The Civil War in Cinema . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 176.

ISBN 9781461739579 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Allen, Thomas B. (2008).

Harriet Tubman, Secret Agent: How Daring Slaves and Free Blacks Spied for the Union During the Civil War . National Geographic Books.

ISBN 978-1-4263-0401-9 .

Anderson, Bern (1989).

By Sea and by River: The Naval History of the Civil War . Da Capo Press.

ISBN 978-0-306-80367-3 .

Ballard, G. A.

(1980).

The Black Battlefleet . Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press.

ISBN 978-0-87021-924-5 .

Baxter, James Phinney, 3rd (1968) [1933].

The Introduction of the Ironclad Warship . Hamden, Connecticut: Archon Books.

OCLC 695838727 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) Bennett, Lieutenant, U.S. Navy, Frank M. (1900).

The Monitor and the Navy under Steam . Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin and Company.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Broadwater, John D. (2012).

USS Monitor : A Historic Ship Completes Its Final Voyage . Texas A&M University Press.

ISBN 978-1-60344-473-6 .

Brown, David K. (2003).

Warrior to Dreadnought : Warship Development 1860–1905 (reprint of the 1997 ed.). London: Caxton Editions.

ISBN 978-1-84067-529-0 .

Campbell, N. J. M. (1979). "United States of America — 'The Old Navy' 1860–1882". In Chesneau, Roger & Kolesnik, Eugene M. (eds.).

Conway's All the World's Fighting Ships 1860–1905 . Greenwich: Conway Maritime Press. pp.

114– 136.

ISBN 0-8317-0302-4 .

Canney, Donald L. (1993).

The Old Steam Navy . Vol. 2: The Ironclads, 1842– 1885. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press.

ISBN 978-0-87021-586-5 .

Clancy, Paul (2013).

Ironclad; The Epic Battle, Calamitous Loss, and Historic Recovery of the USS Monitor . New York: Koehler Books.

ISBN 978-1-938467-11-0 .

"Black Dispatches: Black American Contributions to Union Intelligence During the Civil War" .

Central Intelligence Agency . 7 July 2008. Archived from the original on 2 September 2016 . Retrieved 25 August 2017 .

Davis, Kenneth C.

(1996).

Don't Know Much About the Civil War . New York: William Morrow and Co.

ISBN 978-0-688-11814-3 .

Davis, William C.

(1975).

Duel Between the First Ironclads (Book club ed.). Garden City, New York: Doubleday.

OCLC 1551282 .

" 'USS Monitor Can Be Raised,' Says Top Underwater Salvaging Expert" .

The Harvard Crimson . 16 April 1951 . Retrieved 19 June 2013 .

Dinsmore, David A.; Broadwater, John D. (1999).

"1998 NOAA Research Expedition to the Monitor National Marine Sanctuary" . In Hamilton, RW; Pence, DF; Kesling, DE (eds.).

Assessment and Feasibility of Technical Diving Operations for Scientific Exploration . Archived from the original on 28 September 2012 . Retrieved 8 January 2011 .

Erickson, Mark St. John (4 January 1998).

"Sands of time: Part 5 of 5" .

Orlando Sentinel . Archived from the original on 4 June 2011 . Retrieved 15 April 2009 .

Field, Ron (2011).

Confederate Ironclad vs Union Ironclad: Hampton Roads . Osprey Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-78096-141-5 .

Fuller, Howard J (2008).

Clad in Iron: The American Civil War and the Challenge of British Naval Power . Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press.

ISBN 978-1-59114-297-3 .

Gardiner, Robert, ed. (1992).

Steam, Steel and Shellfire: the Steam Warship 1815–1905 . Conway's History of the Ship. London: Conway Maritime Press.

ISBN 978-1-55750-774-7 .

Garrison, Webb (1994).

Civil War Curiosities: Strange Stories, Oddities, Events and Coincidents . Nashville, Tennessee: Rutledge Hill Press.

ISBN 978-1-56865-527-7 .

Gentile, Gary (1993).

Ironclad Legacy: Battles of the USS Monitor . Gary Gentile Productions.

ISBN 978-0-9621453-8-4 .

Holloway, Anna (2013).

The Last Voyage of the USS Monitor (PDF) . Newport News, VA: The Mariner's Museum. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 December 2013 . Retrieved 22 July 2013 .

Holzer, Harold; Mulligan, Tim (2006).

The Battle of Hampton Roads: New Perspectives on the USS Monitor and CSS Virginia . New York: Fordham University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8232-2481-4 .

Konstam, Angus (2002).

Hampton Roads 1862: First Clash of the Ironclads . Osprey Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-84176-410-8 .

96 pages.

Konstam, Angus (25 January 2002).

Union Monitor 1861–65 . Osprey Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-84176-306-4 .

Leckie, Robert (1990).

None Died in Vain: The Saga of the American Civil War . New York: Harper-Collins.

ISBN 978-0-06-016280-1 .

Maclay, Edgar Stanton (1894).

A history of the United States Navy, from 1775 to 1893 . New York: D. Appleton & Company.

Mariners' Museum.

"The Naming of the Monitor" . Newport News, Virginia: The Mariner's Museum . Retrieved 16 June 2013 .

Mariners' Museum.

"John Payne Bankhead" . Newport News, Virginia: The Mariner's Museum. Archived from the original on 1 June 2013 . Retrieved 30 June 2013 .

Mariners' Museum.

"Last Voyage of the Monitor: December 24th – Forward" . Newport News, Virginia: The Mariner's Museum. Archived from the original on 4 September 2013 . Retrieved 30 June 2013 .

Geer, George S.

"George S. Geer Papers, 1862–1866" (PDF) . The Mariner's Museum, Newport News, Virginia. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 July 2013 . Retrieved 15 August 2013 .

Marvel, William, ed. (2000).

The Monitor Chronicles: One Sailor's Account: Today's Campaign to Recover the Civil War Wreck . New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-684-86997-1 .

McCordock, Robert Stanley (1938).

The Yankee Cheese Box . Dorrance.

Mindell, David A. (2000).

War, Technology, and Experience Aboard the USS Monitor . Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8018-6250-2 .

McPherson, James M.

(1988).

Battle Cry of Freedom . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-503863-7 .

" Monitor " .

Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships (DANFS) .

Naval History & Heritage Command (NH&HC). Archived from the original on 3 July 2013 . Retrieved 7 July 2013 .

"Monitor's Artifacts" . Newport News, Virginia: National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration, National Marine Sanctuary . Retrieved 24 July 2013 .

Nelson, James L. (2009).

Reign of Iron: The Story of the First Battling Ironclads, the Monitor and the Merrimack . New York: HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0-06-052404-3 .

Olmstead, Edwin; Stark, Wayne E.; Tucker, Spencer C. (1997).

The Big Guns: Civil War Siege, Seacoast, and Naval Cannon . Alexandria Bay, New York: Museum Restoration Service.

ISBN 978-0-88855-012-5 .

Park, Carl D. (2007).

Ironclad Down: The USS Merrimack -CSS Virginia from Construction to Destruction . Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press.

ISBN 978-1-59114-659-9 .

Parkes, Oscar (1990) [1957].

British Battleships . Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press.

ISBN 978-1-55750-075-5 .

Quarstein, John V. (1999).

The Battle of the Ironclads . Arcadia Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-7385-0113-0 .

Quarstein, John V. (2006).

A History of Ironclads: The Power of Iron Over Wood . The History Press.

ISBN 978-1-59629-118-8 .

Quarstein, John V. (2010).

The Monitor Boys: The Crew of the Union's First Ironclad . The History Press.

ISBN 978-1-59629-455-4 .

Quarstein, John V. (2012).

The CSS Virginia: Sink Before Surrender . The History Press.

ISBN 978-1-60949-580-0 .

Rawson, Edward K.; Woods, Robert H. (1897).

Official Records of the Union and Confederate Navies in the War of the Rebellion . Washington: Government Printing Office.

Reed, Sir Edward James (1869).

Our Iron-Clad Ships: Their Qualities, Performances, and Cost. With Chapters on Turret Ships, Iron-Clad Rams &c . London: J. Murray.

Rhodes, James Ford (1917).

History of the Civil War . New York, Boston, London: Macmillan & Co.

Roberts, William H. (1999).

USS New Ironsides in the Civil War . Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press.

ISBN 978-1-55750-695-5 .

Roberts, William H. (2002).

Civil War Ironclads: The U.S. Navy and Industrial Mobilization . Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8018-8751-2 .

Silverstone, Paul H. (2006).

Civil War Navies 1855–1883 . The U.S. Navy Warship Series. New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-97870-5 .

"American Civil War Issue" . Smithsonian National Postal Museum. Archived from the original on 27 September 2012 . Retrieved 11 August 2013 .

Southerland, DG; Davidson, DL (2002). "Electronic diving data collection during Monitor expedition 2001".

Oceans 2002 . Vol. 2.

doi : 10.1109/OCEANS.2002.1192089 .

ISBN 978-0-7803-7534-5 .

S2CID 107060334 .

Stern, Philip Van Doren (1962).

The Confederate Navy . New York: Doubleday & Company.

LCCN 62-15914 .

Still Jr., William N.

(1988). Hill, Dina B. (ed.).

Ironclad Captains: The Commanding Officers of the U. S. S.

Monitor . Washington, D.C.: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Government Printing Office.

ISBN 978-0-16-003560-9 .

83 pages.

Sutherland, Jonathan (2004).

African Americans at War: An Encyclopedia, Volume 1 . ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 978-1-57607-746-7 .

Thompson, Stephen C. (1990). "The Design and Construction of the USS Monitor ".

Warship International .

XXVII (3).

ISSN 0043-0374 .

Thulesius, Olav (2007).

The Man who Made the Monitor: A Biography of John Ericsson, Naval Engineer . Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Company.

ISBN 978-0-7864-2766-6 .

Tomblin, Barbara (2009).

Bluejackets and Contrabands: African Americans and the Union Navy . University Press of Kentucky.

ISBN 978-0-8131-7348-1 .

Tucker, Spencer (2006).

Blue & Gray Navies: the Civil War Afloat . Maryland: Naval Institute Press.

ISBN 978-1-59114-882-1 .

Varhola, Michael J (1999).

Everyday Life During the Civil War . Writer's Digest Books.

ISBN 978-1-58297-337-1 .

292 pages.

Wagner, Margaret E.; Gallagher, Gary W.

; Finkelman, Paul (2002).

The Library of Congress Civil War Desk Reference . New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-684-86350-4 .

Ward, Geoffrey; Burns, Ric; Burns, Ken (1990).

The Civil War: An Illustrated History . New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

ISBN 978-0-394-56285-8 .

Wilson, H. W. (1896).

Ironclads in Action: A Sketch of Naval Warfare From 1855 to 1895 . Vol. 1. Boston: Little, Brown.

Primary sources [ edit ] Brooke, John Mercer (2002).

Ironclads and Big Guns of the Confederacy: The Journal and Letters of John M. Brooke . Univ of South Carolina Press.

ISBN 978-1-57003-418-3 .

Bushnell, Cornelius Scranton; Ericsson, John; Welles, Gideon (1899).

The original United States warship "Monitor" . New Haven, Connecticut: National Memorial Association.

Dahlgren, Madeleine Vinton (1882).

Memoir of John A. Dahlgren, Rear-Admiral United States Navy . J. R. Osgood.

Green (USN), Lieutenant Samuel Dana (1862).

"Eye-witness Account of the Battle between the U.S.S.

Monitor and the C.S.S.

Virginia " . U.S. Navy, Naval Historical Foundation, Washington, DC. Archived from the original on 8 December 2013 . Retrieved 18 July 2013 .

Rawson, Edward K., Superintendent Naval War Records; Woods, Robert H. (1898).

OFFICIAL RECORDS of the UNION AND CONFEDERATE NAVIES in the WAR OF THE REBELLION . Washington D. C.: Government Printing Office.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Welles, Gideon (1911).

Diary of Gideon Welles, Secretary of the Navy Under Lincoln and Johnson . Vol. 1. Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company.

Worden, John Lorimer ; Greene, Samuel Dana; Ramsay, H. Ashton; Watson, Eugene Winslow (1912).

The Monitor and the Merrimac : Both Sides of the Story . New York, London: Harper and Brothers.

Further reading [ edit ] Bennett, Frank Marion; Weir, Robert (1896).

The Steam Navy of the United States: A History of the Growth of the Steam Vessel of War in the U.S. Navy, and of the Naval Engineer Corps . Pittsburgh: Warren & Company; Press of W. T. Nicholson.

Gott, Kendall D. (2003).

Where the South Lost the War: An Analysis of the Fort Henry–Fort Donelson Campaign, February 1862 . Stackpole books.

ISBN 978-0-8117-0049-8 .

Holloway, Anna Gibson and White, Jonathan W. (2018).

"Our Little Monitor": The Greatest Invention of the Civil War . Kent, Ohio: Kent State University Press.

ISBN 978-1-60635-314-1 Holloway, Anna Gibson (2023). "Encounters with the Monitor Boys", in Brian Matthew Jordan and Jonathan White, eds., Final Resting Places: Reflections on the Meaning of Civil War Graves , Athens, Georgia: The University of Georgia Press, 2023, pp. 54–75.

[ ISBN missing ] Holzer, Harold (2013).

The Civil War in Fifty Objects . New York: Penguin Books: New York Historical Society.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) 416 pages.

[ ISBN missing ] Johnson, Robert Underwood ; Buel, C.C., eds. (1887).

Battles and Leaders of the Civil War . Vol. I. New York: Century Company.

Mokin, Arthur (1991).

Ironclad: the Monitor and the Merrimack . Presidio Press.

ISBN 978-0-8914-1405-6 .

Peterkin, Ernest W. (1985).

Drawings of the U.S.S.

Monitor : A Catalog and Technical Analysis . National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

Quarstein, John V. (2000).

C.S.S.

Virginia , Mistress of Hampton Roads . self-published for the Virginia Civil War Battles and Leaders Series.

ISBN 978-1-56190-118-0 .

Quarstein, John V. (1997).

The Civil War on the Virginia Peninsula . Arcadia Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-7385-4438-0 .

Sheridan, Robert E. (2004).

Iron from the Deep: The Discovery and Recovery of the USS Monitor . Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press.

ISBN 978-1-55750-413-5 .

Snow, Richard (2016).

Iron Dawn: The Monitor , the Merrimack , and the Civil War Sea Battle that Changed History . Scribner.

ISBN 978-1-4767-9420-4 .

.

Still, William N. Jr.

(1988) [1971].

Iron Afloat: The Story of the Confederate Armorclads (Reprint ed.). Columbia: University of South Carolina Press.

ISBN 978-0-87249-616-3 .

Still, William N. Jr. (1988).

Monitor Builders: A Historical Study of the Principal Firms and Individuals Involved in the Construction of USS Monitor . Washington, DC: National Park Service.

Welles, Gideon (1911). Thaddeus Welles (ed.).

Diary of Gideon Welles, Secretary of the Navy Under Lincoln and Johnson . Vol. 2. Boston & New York: Houghton Mifflin Company.

Welles, Gideon (1911). Thaddeus Welles (ed.).

Diary of Gideon Welles, Secretary of the Navy Under Lincoln and Johnson . Vol. 3. Boston & New York: Houghton Mifflin Company.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to USS Monitor (ship, 1862) .

The Monitor Center ( Archived 22 October 2004 at the Wayback Machine ) at the Mariners' Museum , Newport News, Virginia Battle of Hampton Roads schematic map ( Archived 21 August 2015 at the Wayback Machine ) Seattle Pilot mentioning the depth charging of the Monitor Museum of the Confederacy in Richmond, VA official website The American Civil War Museum US Navy Library on USS Monitor Naval History and Heritage Command: USS Monitor Video of model vibrating-lever engine of USS Monitor Project Cheesebox vol. 1 Project Cheesebox vol. 2 Project Cheesebox vol. 3 "Preserving the USS Monitor 2001" .

NOAA Ocean Explorer . March–August 2001 . Retrieved 24 February 2015 .

" Monitor Expedition 2002" .

NOAA Ocean Explorer . June–December 2002 . Retrieved 24 February 2015 .

v t e Ironclads of the United States Coastal monitors Monitor Onondaga Passaic class Canonicus class Miantonomoh class River and harbor monitors Ozark Roanoke Neosho class Milwaukee class Marietta class Casco class Ocean-going monitors Dictator Puritan Kalamazoo class Riverine casemate ironclads Indianola Benton Essex Chillicothe Choctaw Lafayette Tuscumbia City class Ocean-going casemate ironclads Stevens Battery Dunderberg Commissioned ironclads Atlanta Columbia Eastport Stonewall Tennessee Never-commissioned ironclads Albemarle Baltic Missouri Nashville Texas Miscellaneous ironclads USRC Naugatuck Galena New Ironsides Keokuk Spuyten Duyvil v t e The Battle of Hampton Roads People John Lorimer Worden Samuel Dana Greene Gideon Welles John Marston Franklin Buchanan Catesby ap Roger Jones Gustavus Fox Stephen Mallory French Forrest John Ericsson Louis N. Stodder Ships USS Monitor CSS Virginia USS Congress USS Cumberland USS Zouave USS Roanoke USS Minnesota USS St. Lawrence CSS Beaufort CSS Raleigh CSS Patrick Henry CSS Jamestown Places Hampton Roads Tidewater James River Elizabeth River Norfolk Fort Monroe Sewell's Point v t e Shipwrecks and maritime incidents in 1862 Shipwrecks 2 Jan: Northern Light 4 Jan: Santi-Pietri 9 Jan: USS Meteor , USS Potomac 20 Jan: USS Margaret Scott 23 Jan: Ocean Chief 24 Jan: USS Peri 25 Jan: USS New England , USS Stephen Young 26 Jan: USS India , USS Timor 7 Feb: CSS Curlew 8 Feb: CSS Sea Bird 10 Feb: CSS Appomattox , CSS Black Warrior , CSS Fanny , CSS Forrest 20 Feb: USS Isaac N. Seymour 25 Feb: USS R. B. Forbes 8 Mar: USS Congress , USS Cumberland 9 Mar: CSS George Page 10 Mar: USS Whitehall March (unknown date): Camilla (or Memphis ) 4 Apr: CSS Red Rover 7 Apr: CSS Grampus 8 Apr: CSS New Orleans 14 Apr: Erebus 19 Apr: USS Maria J. Carlton 24 Apr: CSS General Lovell , CSS Governor Moore , CSS Manassas , CSS Stonewall Jackson , Sweepstakes , USS Varuna 25 Apr: CSS Mississippi , CSRC Pickens , Pioneer , Washington , CSS Pamlico 28 Apr: CSS Louisiana , CSS McRae April (unknown date): CSS Jackson , CSS Oregon , CSS Carondelet 10 May: USS Cincinnati , CSS Germantown , USS Mound City , CSS Fulton 11 May: CSS Virginia 15 May: CSS Jamestown May (unknown date): CSS United States 6 Jun: CSS Colonel Lovell , CSS General Beauregard , CSS General Bragg , CSS General M. Jeff Thompson , CSS General Sterling Price , CSS General Sumter , CSS Little Rebel 16 Jun: CSS Maurepas 26 Jun: CSS General Earl Van Dorn , CSS Livingston , CSS General Polk 28 Jun: USS Island Belle 15 Jul: Johanna Wagner , USS Sidney C. Jones 21 Jul: USS Sallie Wood 24 Jul: Lord of the Isles 6 Aug: CSS Arkansas 14-15 Aug: USS Sumter 23 Aug: USS Adirondack 24 Aug: USS Henry Andrew , USS Isaac N. Seymour 10 Sep: USS Tigress 2 Oct: Iona 15 Oct: G. L. Brockenborough 25 Nov: USS Ellis November (unknown date): USS Mingo 12 Dec: USS Cairo 31 Dec: USS Monitor Unknown date: USS Noble Other incidents 11 Jan: HMS St Vincent January (unknown date): Mona's Queen 22 Feb: HMS Defence February: USS Vermont 8 Mar: USS Minnesota 8 May: USS Galena 13 May: Planter 23 Jun: Memphis 7 Aug: USS Oneida 17 Aug: Great Eastern 15 Nov: Admiral Moorsom 22 Nov: USS Bainbridge Unknown date: Young America 1861 1863 v t e U.S. National Register of Historic Places in North Carolina Topics Contributing property Keeper of the Register Historic district History of the National Register of Historic Places National Park Service Property types Lists by county Alamance Alexander Alleghany Anson Ashe Avery Beaufort Bertie Bladen Brunswick Buncombe Burke Cabarrus Caldwell Camden Carteret Caswell Catawba Chatham Cherokee Chowan Clay Cleveland Columbus Craven Cumberland Currituck Dare Davidson Davie Duplin Durham Edgecombe Forsyth Franklin Gaston Gates Graham Granville Greene Guilford Halifax Harnett Haywood Henderson Hertford Hoke Hyde Iredell Jackson Johnston Jones Lee Lenoir Lincoln Macon Madison Martin McDowell Mecklenburg Mitchell Montgomery Moore Nash New Hanover Northampton Onslow Orange Pamlico Pasquotank Pender Perquimans Person Pitt Polk Randolph Richmond Robeson Rockingham Rowan Rutherford Sampson Scotland Stanly Stokes Surry Swain Transylvania Tyrrell Union Vance Wake Warren Washington Watauga Wayne Wilkes Wilson Yadkin Yancey Other lists Bridges National Historic Landmarks v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐894tp
Cached time: 20250818132910
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.332 seconds
Real time usage: 2.795 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 16944/1000000
Revision size: 129638/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 825508/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9184/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 437905/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.236/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13145676/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2074.060      1 -total
 21.86%  453.479     74 Template:Cite_book
 13.69%  284.021      2 Template:Reflist
 13.67%  283.423     37 Template:Navbox
 10.68%  221.599     31 Template:Cite_web
 10.42%  216.157     73 Template:USS
  9.13%  189.297      3 Template:Infobox
  8.84%  183.372      2 Template:Military_navigation
  8.83%  183.049      1 Template:Union_ironclads
  8.39%  174.082      1 Template:1862_shipwrecks Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:32197:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818132910 and revision id 1302083879. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=USS_Monitor&oldid=1302083879 " Categories : 1862 ships American Civil War monitors of the United States American Civil War on the National Register of Historic Places Archaeology of shipwrecks Battle of Hampton Roads Dare County, North Carolina Ironclad warships of the Union Navy Maritime incidents in December 1862 Monitors of the United States Navy National Historic Landmarks in North Carolina National Register of Historic Places in Dare County, North Carolina Ships built in Brooklyn Shipwrecks in the Atlantic Ocean Shipwrecks of the American Civil War Shipwrecks of the Carolina coast Shipwrecks on the National Register of Historic Places in North Carolina Shipwrecks Underwater archaeological sites Underwater archaeology Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles using NRISref without a reference number Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Good articles Use dmy dates from September 2020 Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1: long volume value Pages with missing ISBNs CS1 maint: publisher location Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 07:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents USS Monitor 27 languages Add topic

