Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 2.1 According to Diogenes Laertius 2.2 Ethics 2.3 Physics 2.4 Logic 2.5 Philosophy of language 3 Antisthenes and the Cynics 4 Notes 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Antisthenes 58 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Lëtzebuergesch Magyar مصرى مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Polski Ποντιακά Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greek philosopher, founder of Cynicism (c.446–c.366 BCE) For other people named Antisthenes, see Antisthenes (disambiguation) .

Antisthenes Portrait bust of Antisthenes, found at the Villa of Cassius at Tivoli, Lazio , 1774 ( Museo Pio-Clementino ) Born c.

446 BCE [ 1 ] Athens Died c.

366 BCE [ 1 ] (aged approximately 80) Athens Philosophical work Era Ancient Greek philosophy Region Western philosophy School Cynicism Main interests Asceticism , ethics , language , literature , logic Notable ideas Laying the foundations of Cynic philosophy Distinction between sense and reference Antisthenes ( / æ n ˈ t ɪ s θ ɪ n iː z / ; [ 2 ] Ancient Greek : Ἀντισθένης , pronounced [an.tis.tʰén.ε:s] ; c.

446 – c.

366 BCE) [ 1 ] was a Greek philosopher and a pupil of Socrates . Antisthenes first learned rhetoric under Gorgias before becoming an ardent disciple of Socrates. He adopted and developed the ethical side of Socrates' teachings, advocating an ascetic life lived in accordance with virtue . Later writers regarded him as the founder of Cynic philosophy.

Life [ edit ] Antisthenes was born c.

446 BCE, the son of Antisthenes, an Athenian . His mother was thought to have been a Thracian , [ 3 ] though some say a Phrygian , an opinion probably derived from his sarcastic reply to a man who reviled him as not being a genuine Athenian citizen, that the mother of the gods was a Phrygian [ 4 ] (referring to Cybele , the Anatolian counterpart of the Greek goddess Rhea ).

[ 5 ] In his youth he fought at Tanagra (426 BCE), and was a disciple first of Gorgias , and then of Socrates ; so eager was he to hear the words of Socrates that he used to walk daily from the port of Peiraeus to Athens (about 9 kilometres), and persuaded his friends to accompany him.

[ 6 ] Eventually he was present at Socrates' death.

[ 7 ] He never forgave his master's persecutors, and is said to have been instrumental in procuring their punishment.

[ 8 ] He survived the Battle of Leuctra (371 BCE), as he is reported to have compared the victory of the Thebans to a set of schoolboys beating their master.

[ 9 ] Although Eudokia Makrembolitissa supposedly tells us that he died at the age of 70, [ 10 ] he was apparently still alive in 366 BCE, [ 11 ] and he must have been nearer to 80 years old when he died at Athens, c.

365 BCE. He is said to have lectured at the Cynosarges , [ 12 ] a gymnasium for the use of Athenians born of foreign mothers, near the temple of Heracles . Filled with enthusiasm for the Socratic idea of virtue, he founded a school of his own in the Cynosarges, where he attracted the poorer classes by the simplicity of his life and teaching. He wore a cloak and carried a staff and a wallet, and this costume became the uniform of his followers.

[ 6 ] Diogenes Laërtius says that his works filled ten volumes, but of these, only fragments remain.

[ 6 ] His favourite style seems to have been dialogues, some of them being vehement attacks on his contemporaries, as on Alcibiades in the second of his two works entitled Cyrus , on Gorgias in his Archelaus and on Plato in his Satho .

[ 13 ] His style was pure and elegant, and Theopompus even said that Plato stole from him many of his thoughts.

[ 14 ] Cicero , after reading some works by Antisthenes, found his works pleasing and called him "a man more intelligent than learned".

[ 15 ] He possessed considerable powers of wit and sarcasm, and was fond of playing upon words; saying, for instance, that he would rather fall among crows ( korakes ) than flatterers ( kolakes ), for the one devour the dead, but the other the living.

[ 16 ] Two declamations have survived, named Ajax and Odysseus , which are purely rhetorical.

Antisthenes's nickname was The (Absolute) Dog ( ἁπλοκύων , Diog. Laert. 6.13) [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Marble bust of Antisthenes based on the same original ( British Museum ) According to Diogenes Laertius [ edit ] In his Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers Diogenes Laertius lists the following as the favourite themes of Antisthenes: "He would prove that virtue can be taught; and that nobility belongs to none other than the virtuous. And he held virtue to be sufficient in itself to ensure happiness, since it needed nothing else except the strength of spirit. And he maintained that virtue is an affair of deeds and does not need a store of words or learning; that the wise man is self-sufficing, for all the goods of others are his; that ill repute is a good thing and much the same as pain; that the wise man will be guided in his public acts not by the established laws but by the law of virtue; that he will also marry in order to have children from union with the handsomest women; furthermore that he will not disdain to love, for only the wise man knows who are worthy to be loved".

[ 20 ] Ethics [ edit ] Antisthenes was a pupil of Socrates, from whom he imbibed the fundamental ethical precept that virtue , not pleasure , is the end of existence.  Everything that the wise person does, Antisthenes said, conforms to perfect virtue, [ 21 ] and pleasure is not only unnecessary, but a positive evil. He is reported to have held pain [ 22 ] and even ill-repute ( Greek : ἀδοξία ) [ 23 ] to be blessings, and he said, "I'd rather be mad than feel pleasure".

[ 24 ] However, it is probable that he did not consider all pleasure worthless, but only that which results from the gratification of sensual or artificial desires, for we find him praising the pleasures which spring "from out of one's soul," [ 25 ] and the enjoyments of a wisely chosen friendship.

[ 26 ] The supreme good he placed in a life lived according to virtue — virtue consisting in action, which when obtained is never lost, and exempts the wise person from error.

[ 27 ] It is closely connected with reason, but to enable it to develop itself in action, and to be sufficient for happiness, it requires the aid of Socratic strength ( Greek : Σωκρατικὴ ἱσχύς ).

[ 21 ] Physics [ edit ] His work on natural philosophy (the Physicus ) contained a theory of the nature of the gods , in which he argued that there were many gods believed in by the people, but only one natural God .

[ 28 ] He also said that God resembles nothing on earth, and therefore could not be understood from any representation.

[ 29 ] Logic [ edit ] In logic , Antisthenes was troubled by the problem of universals . As a proper nominalist , he held that definition and predication are either false or tautological , since we can only say that every individual is what it is, and can give no more than a description of its qualities, e.g. that silver is like tin in colour.

[ 30 ] Thus, he disbelieved the Platonic system of Ideas. "A horse I can see," said Antisthenes, "but horsehood I cannot see".

[ 31 ] Definition is merely a circuitous method of stating an identity: "a tree is a vegetable growth" is logically no more than "a tree is a tree".

Philosophy of language [ edit ] Antisthenes, part of a fresco in the National University of Athens Antisthenes apparently distinguished "a general object that can be aligned with the meaning of the utterance" from "a particular object of extensional reference". This "suggests that he makes a distinction between sense and reference".

[ 32 ] The principal basis of this claim is a quotation in Alexander of Aphrodisias ' “Comments on Aristotle 's 'Topics'” with a three-way distinction: the semantic medium, δι' ὧν λέγουσι an object external to the semantic medium, περὶ οὗ λέγουσιν the direct indication of a thing, σημαίνειν … τὸ … } [ 33 ] Antisthenes and the Cynics [ edit ] In later times Antisthenes came to be seen as the founder of the Cynics , but it is by no means certain that he would have recognized the term.

Aristotle , writing a generation later refers several times to Antisthenes [ 34 ] and his followers "the Antistheneans", [ 30 ] but makes no reference to Cynicism.

[ 35 ] There are many later tales about the infamous Cynic Diogenes of Sinope dogging Antisthenes' footsteps and becoming his faithful hound, [ 36 ] but it is similarly uncertain that the two men ever met. Some scholars, drawing on the discovery of defaced coins from Sinope dating from the period 350–340 BCE, believe that Diogenes only moved to Athens after the death of Antisthenes, [ 37 ] and it has been argued that the stories linking Antisthenes to Diogenes were invented by the Stoics in a later period in order to provide a succession linking Socrates to Zeno via Antisthenes, Diogenes, and Crates .

[ 38 ] These tales were important to the Stoics for establishing a chain of teaching that ran from Socrates to Zeno.

[ 39 ] Others argue that the evidence from the coins is weak, and thus Diogenes could have moved to Athens well before 340 BCE.

[ 40 ] It is also possible that Diogenes visited Athens and Antisthenes before his exile, and returned to Sinope.

[ 37 ] Antisthenes certainly adopted a rigorous ascetic lifestyle, [ 41 ] and he developed many of the principles of Cynic philosophy which became an inspiration for Diogenes and later Cynics. It was said that he had laid the foundations of the city which they afterwards built.

[ 42 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Luz, Menahem (2019).

"Antisthenes' Portrayal of Socrates" from "Brill's Companion to the Reception of Socrates" . Koninklijke Brill NV, Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill. p. 124.

ISBN 978-90-04-39674-6 .

^ Jones, Daniel; Roach, Peter James; Hartman, James; Setter, Jane, eds. (2006).

Cambridge English Pronouncing Dictionary (17th ed.). Cambridge UP.

^ Suda , Antisthenes .; Laërtius 1925 , § 1.

^ "A Dictionary of Greek and Roman biography and mythology — Antisthenes" .

www.perseus.tufts.edu .

Archived from the original on 2021-05-31 . Retrieved 2021-08-10 .

^ "CYBELE (Kybele) - Phrygian Goddess, Mother of the Gods" .

www.theoi.com . Retrieved 2021-08-10 .

^ a b c One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Antisthenes ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 2 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 146.

^ Plato, Phaedo , 59b.

^ Laërtius 1925 , § 9.

^ Plutarch, Lycurgus , 30.

^ Eudocia, Violarium , 96 ^ Diodorus Siculus, xv. 76.4 ^ Laërtius 1925 , § 13.

^ Athenaeus, v. 220c-e ^ Athenaeus, xi. 508c-d ^ " Κῦρος δ᾽, ε᾽ mihi sic placuit ut cetera Antisthenis, hominis acuti magis quam eruditi ". Cicero, Epistulae ad Atticum , Book XII, Letter 38, section 2. In English translation: "Books four (δ᾽) and five (ε᾽) of Cyrus I found as pleasing as the others composed by Antisthenes, he is a man who is sharp rather than learned".

^ Laërtius 1925 , § 4.

^ Prince, Susan (Dept. of Classics, University of Colorado, Boulder).

"Review of LE. Navia - Antisthenes of Athens: Setting the World Aright" .

Bryn Mawr Classical Review . Retrieved 6 August 2017 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) — Navia, Luis E. (2001).

Antisthenes of Athens: Setting the World Aright . Westport: Greenwood Press. pp. xii, 176.

ISBN 0-313-31672-4 .

^ Magill, Frank N. (2003).

The Ancient World: Dictionary of World Biography . Routledge. p.

89 .

ISBN 978-1-135-45740-2 .

^ Judge, Harry George; Blake, Robert (1988).

World history . Oxford University Press. p.

104 .

ISBN 978-0-19-869135-8 .

^ Laërtius 1925 , § 10.

^ a b Laërtius 1925 , § 11.

^ Julian, Oration , 6.181b ^ Laërtius 1925 , § 3, 7.

^ Laërtius 1925 , § 3.

^ Xenophon, Symposium , iv. 41.

^ Laërtius 1925 , § 12.

^ Laërtius 1925 , § 11–12, 104–105.

^ Cicero, De Natura Deorum , i. 13.

^ Clement of Alexandria, Stromata , v.

^ a b Aristotle, Metaphysics , 1043b24 ^ Simplicius, in Arist. Cat.

208, 28 ^ Prince, Susan (2015).

Antisthenes of Athens: Texts, Translations, and Commentary . University of Michigan Press.

p. 20 ^ Prince 2015, pp. 518–522 (Antisthenes's literary remains: t. 153B.1).

^ Aristotle, Metaphysics , 1024b26; Rhetoric , 1407a9; Topics , 104b21; Politics , 1284a15 ^ Long 1996, page 32 ^ Laërtius 1925 , § 6, 18, 21; Dio Chrysostom, Orations , viii. 1–4; Aelian, x. 16; Stobaeus, Florilegium , 13.19 ^ a b Long 1996, page 45 ^ Dudley 1937, pages 2-4 ^ Navia, Diogenes the Cynic , page 100 ^ Navia, Diogenes the Cynic , pages 34, 112-3 ^ Xenophon, Symposium , iv. 34–44.

^ Laërtius 1925 , § 15.

References [ edit ] Brancacci, Aldo. Oikeios logos.

La filosofia del linguaggio di Antistene , Napoli: Bibliopolis, 1990 (fr. tr. Antisthène, Le discours propre, Paris, Vrin, 2005) Dudley, Donald R. (1937), A History of Cynicism from Diogenes to the 6th Century A.D.

. Cambridge Laërtius, Diogenes .

"The Cynics: Antisthenes" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 2:6. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library. § 1–19.

Long, A. A. (1996), "The Socratic Tradition: Diogenes, Crates, and Hellenistic Ethics", in Bracht Branham, R.; Goulet-Caze Marie-Odile, The Cynics: The Cynic Movement in Antiquity and Its Legacy . University of California Press.

ISBN 0-520-21645-8 Luis E. Navia, (2005).

Diogenes The Cynic: The War Against The World . Humanity Books.

ISBN 1-59102-320-3 Prince, Susan (2015).

Antisthenes of Athens: Texts, Translations, and Commentary . University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 978-0-472-11934-9 Further reading [ edit ] Branham, R. Bracht; Cazé, Marie-Odile Goulet, eds. (1996).

The Cynics: The Cynic Movement in Antiquity and Its Legacy . Berkeley: University of California Press.

Chappuis, Charles (2024).

Antisthenes: The Founder of Cynicism . Translated by Robinson, Richard. Portland, OR: Sunny Lou Publishing.

ISBN 978-1955392730 .

Fuentes González, Pedro Pablo (2013). "En defensa del encuentro entre dos Perros, Antístenes y Diógenes: historia de una tensa amistad".

Cuadernos de Filología Clásica: Estudios Griegos e Indoeuropeos .

23 : 225–267 (reprint in: V. Suvák [ed.], Antisthenica Cynica Socratica, Praha: Oikoumene, 2014, p. 11–71).

Guthrie, William Keith Chambers (1969).

The Fifth-Century Enlightenment . A History of Greek Philosophy. Vol. 3. London: Cambridge University Press.

Meijer P. A., A New Perspective on Antisthenes: Logos, Predicate and Ethics in his Philosophy , Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press B.V., 2017 Navia, Luis E. (1996).

Classical Cynicism: A Critical Study . Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.

Navia, Luis E. (1995).

The Philosophy of Cynicism An Annotated Bibliography . Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.

Rankin, H. D. (1986).

Anthisthenes Sokratikos . Amsterdam: A.M. Hakkert.

ISBN 90-256-0896-5 .

Rankin, H. D. (1983).

Sophists, Socratics, and Cynics . London: Croom Helm.

ISBN 9780389204213 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Sayre, Farrand (1948). "Antisthenes the Socratic".

The Classical Journal .

43 : 237– 244.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Antisthenes .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Antisthenes .

"Antisthenes" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Lives & Writings on the Cynics , directory of literary references to Ancient Cynics Xenophon , Symposium , Book IV v t e Cynic philosophers Greek era Antisthenes Diogenes Onesicritus Monimus Philiscus Hegesias of Sinope Anaximenes of Lampsacus Crates Hipparchia Metrocles Cleomenes Bion Menippus Menedemus Cercidas Teles Meleager Roman era Favonius Demetrius Dio Chrysostom Agathobulus Demonax Peregrinus Proteus Theagenes Oenomaus Pancrates Crescens Heraclius Asclepiades Maximus I of Constantinople Horus Sallustius v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Antisthenes&oldid=1252864914 " Categories : 440s BC births 360s BC deaths 5th-century BC Athenians 5th-century BC Greek philosophers 4th-century BC Athenians 4th-century BC Greek philosophers Ancient Greek ethicists Ascetics Cynic philosophers Pupils of Socrates Classical Greek philosophers Ancient Athenian philosophers Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages with Ancient Greek (to 1453) IPA Articles containing Greek-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers CS1 maint: location missing publisher Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 23 October 2024, at 07:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Antisthenes 58 languages Add topic

