Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Prelude 2 Battle 3 Aftermath 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Battle of White Mountain 46 languages العربية Aragonés تۆرکجه Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 50°04′42″N 14°19′10″E ﻿ / ﻿ 50.07833°N 14.31944°E ﻿ / 50.07833; 14.31944 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Battle of the White Mountain ) 1620 battle of the Thirty Years' War Battle of White Mountain Part of the Bohemian Revolt during the Thirty Years' War Battle of White Mountain , oil painting by P. Snaijers Date 8 November 1620 Location White Mountain ( Czech : Bílá hora ), near Prague , Bohemian Confederation (present-day Czech Republic ) 50°04′42″N 14°19′10″E ﻿ / ﻿ 50.07833°N 14.31944°E ﻿ / 50.07833; 14.31944 Result Imperial-Spanish victory End of Bohemian revolt Territorial changes Habsburg forces capture Prague Belligerents Habsburg Monarchy Catholic League Spanish Empire Bohemian Confederation Electoral Palatinate Transylvanian and Hungarian mercenaries Commanders and leaders Johann von Tilly Maximilian of Bavaria Charles de Bucquoy Guillermo Verdugo Carlo Spinelli Christian of Anhalt Christian the Younger ( POW ) Jindřich Matyáš Thurn Heinrich von Schlick Johann Ernst Strength 23,000 12 guns [ 1 ] 21,000 10 guns [ 1 ] Casualties and losses 650 killed and wounded [ 2 ] 2,800 killed and wounded [ 2 ] White Mountain class=notpageimage| Location within Prague Show map of Prague White Mountain White Mountain (Czech Republic) Show map of Czech Republic v t e Thirty Years' War Bohemian Revolt (1618–1620) Pilsen Lomnice Sablat Wisternitz Bautzen White Mountain Neu Titschein Palatinate campaign (1620–1623) Bad Kreuznach Oppenheim Bacharach Jülich Mingolsheim Wimpfen Höchst Bergen op Zoom Heidelberg Fleurus Mannheim Frankenthal Stadtlohn Transylvanian invasions of Hungary (1619-1621) , (1623–1624) , (1626) Humenné Érsekújvár Tyrnau [ de ] Hodonín Vlach uprisings Danish intervention (1625–1629) Breda Dessau Bridge Oldenzaal Lutter am Barenberge Groenlo Stralsund Wolgast 1st Magdeburg 's-Hertogenbosch Swedish intervention (1630–1635) Swedish landing Greifenhagen Frankfurt 2rd Magdeburg Werben 1st Breitenfeld Bamberg Rain Maastricht Nuremberg 1st Steinau Wiesloch Alte Veste Benfeld Lützen Oldendorf Pfaffenhofen 2nd Steinau Konstanz 1st Breisach 1st Rheinfelden Liegnitz [ de ] 1st Nördlingen Strasbourg Bridge Swedish-French Period (1635–1648) Les Avins Leuven Schenkenschans Ray-sur-Saône Dömitz Haselünne [ de ] Raon Tornavento 3rd Magdeburg Somme 1st Corbie Wittstock 2nd Breda Venlo Leipzig Hanau 2nd Rheinfelden Saint Omer Fuenterrabía Kallo Wittenweiher Thann [ de ] Vlotho 2nd Breisach 1st Freiberg Chemnitz Melnik Thionville Salses Turin Cambrils Montjuïc Preßnitz Plauen La Marfée Dorsten Wolfenbüttel Kempen Honnecourt Schweidnitz 2nd Breitenfeld 2nd Freiberg Rocroi 1st Brno Tuttlingen Kolding Freiburg Philippsburg Jüterbog Bysjön Jankau 2nd Brno Mergentheim 2nd Nördlingen 3rd Hulst Korneuburg [ de ] Totenhöhe [ de ] Hohentübingen [ de ] Mardyck Dunkirk Triebl Naples Zusmarshausen Wevelinghoven Lens Dachau [ de ] Prague Naval battles Gibraltar Genoa Cadiz St. Kitts Matanzas Bay The Slaak Lake Constance 1st Saint Martin Lizard Point Dunkirk Calais The Downs Cape St. Vincent 2nd Saint Martin Lister Dyb Colberger Heide Fehmarn Related Conflicts Dutch-Spanish Conflict Dutch–Portuguese War Revolt of the Leagues in Graubünden Vlach uprisings in Moravia Hungarian Rebellion (1619-1626) [ cs ] Valtellina War Genoese-Savoyard War Anglo-Spanish War (1625–1630) Upper Austrian peasant war of 1626 Czech peasant uprising (1628) [ cs ] War of the Mantuan Succession Polish–Swedish war Ten Years War [ fr ] Franco-Spanish War Piedmontese Civil War Catalan Revolt Portuguese Restoration War Torstenson War Hessian War Neapolitan Revolt Treaties v t e Bohemian Revolt Pilsen Lomnice Sablat Wisternitz White Mountain The Battle of White Mountain ( Czech : Bitva na Bílé hoře ; German : Schlacht am Weißen Berg ) was fought on 8 November 1620 in the early stages of the Thirty Years' War . An army of 21,000 Bohemians and mercenaries under Christian of Anhalt was defeated by 23,000 men of the combined armies of Ferdinand II, Holy Roman Emperor , led by Charles Bonaventure de Longueval, Count of Bucquoy , and the German Catholic League led by Johann Tserclaes, later Count of Tilly , at Bílá Hora ("White Mountain") near Prague .

[ 3 ] Imperial forces entered Prague on 9 November and King Frederick I of Bohemia fled into Silesia.

Prelude [ edit ] In the early 17th century most of the Bohemian estates, although under the dominion of the predominantly Catholic Holy Roman Empire, had large Protestant populations, and had been granted rights and protections allowing them varying degrees of religious and political freedom.

In 1617, as the health of Emperor Matthias deteriorated, his cousin Ferdinand – a devout Catholic and proponent of the Counter-Reformation – was named his successor as Holy Roman Emperor and King of Bohemia . This led to deep consternation among many Bohemian Protestants, who feared not only the loss of their properties, but also of their traditional semi-autonomy, under which many of the estates had separate, individual constitutions governing their relationship with the Empire, and where the king was elected by the local leaders.

[ 4 ] Ferdinand (who would become Emperor Ferdinand II following Matthias' death in 1619) saw Protestantism as inimical to the Empire, and wanted to impose absolutist rule on Bohemia while encouraging conversion to the Catholic faith. He also hoped to reclaim church properties which had been seized by Protestants at the start of the Reformation decades earlier.

Particularly galling to Protestants were perceived violations of Emperor Rudolf II 's 1609 Letter of Majesty, which had ensured religious freedom throughout Bohemia .

[ 5 ] In May 1618, wanting to air their grievances over this and other issues, a group of Bohemian noblemen met representatives of the Emperor at the royal castle in Prague ; the meeting ended with two of the representatives and their scribe being thrown out a high window and seriously injured. This incident, known as the Third Defenestration of Prague , triggered the Bohemian Revolt.

[ 6 ] In November 1619, Elector Palatine Frederick V , who like many of the rebels was a Calvinist, was chosen as King of Bohemia by the Bohemian Electorate.

Battle [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Battle of White Mountain" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Plan of the battle from Theatrum Europaeum : Bohemians above, Imperial and Bavarian forces below Battle of White Mountain (1620) In 1620, now fully established as emperor, Ferdinand II set out to conquer Bohemia and make an example of the rebels. King Frederick and his military commander, Prince Christian of Anhalt , had organized a Protestant army of 30,000 men; Ferdinand countered with a force of 25,000, many of them seasoned soldiers, under the capable leadership of Field Marshal Tilly , a Catholic Spanish-Flemish nobleman. Tilly's army enjoyed the advantage of including two successful military leaders – Tilly himself and the future General Wallenstein . Tilly's force was made up of two distinct groups: Imperial troops commanded by Charles Bonaventure de Longueval, Count of Bucquoy , and soldiers of the German Catholic League , directly under Tilly. All of the armies of the day employed numerous mercenaries, including, by some definitions, Tilly himself. Serving with the Catholic League as an official observer was the future "father of modern philosophy", René Descartes .

[ 7 ] After conquering most of western Bohemia, the Imperial army made for Prague , the Bohemian capital, then in rebel hands. The Bohemians attempted to block them by setting up  defensive positions, which the Imperial army simply bypassed. Force-marching his men, Christian of Anhalt managed to get ahead of the Imperial army just before Prague. He thus gained an advantageous position on the "White Mountain", actually a low plateau, but had little time to set up defensive works. Enthusiasm for joining battle was low on both sides. After the reverses of the previous several weeks, Christian of Anhalt's army had been reduced to about 15,000 men, with little prospect of victory; the mercenaries on both sides had not been paid in months; and with winter approaching, cold wet weather made for less than ideal combat conditions.

[ 8 ] On 8 November a small Imperial force was sent to probe the Protestant flank. To their surprise, the Bohemians retreated at their advance. Tilly quickly sent in reinforcements, and the Bohemian flank began to crumble. Anhalt tried to relieve the situation by sending forward infantry and cavalry led by his son Christian II .

[ 9 ] The cavalry charged into the Imperial infantry, causing significant casualties, but Tilly countered with his own cavalry, forcing the Bohemian horsemen to retire.

[ 10 ] The Bohemian infantry, who were only now approaching the Imperial army, saw the cavalry retreating, at which they fired one volley at extreme range before retreating themselves. A small group of Imperial cavalry began circling the Protestant forces, driving them to the middle of the battlefield.

[ 8 ] With the Bohemian army already demoralized, company after company began retreating, most without having actually entered the battle. Tilly and his Imperial cavalrymen advanced with 2,000 Bavarian hussars , steadily pushing Protestant forces back to the Star Palace (just west of Prague), where the rebels tried without success to establish a line of defense.

[ 11 ] The Bohemian army was no match for the Emperor Ferdinand's troops. The actual battle lasted only an hour and left the Bohemian army in tatters. Some 4,000 Protestants were killed or captured, while Imperial losses amounted to only about 700.

[ 12 ] Aftermath [ edit ] The 27 tributary crosses Painting celebrating the Catholic victory, by Anton Stevens (c. 1610–1675). In the upper part there is Our Lady of Victory surrounded by saints; in the lower left-hand corner there is the victorious Emperor Ferdinand II with his son Ferdinand III and the Bohemian lion .

With the Bohemian army destroyed, Tilly entered Prague and the revolt collapsed. King Frederick fled the country with his wife Elizabeth after only a year on the throne (gaining him the mocking nickname the Winter King ). Forty-seven leaders of the insurrection were put on trial, and twenty-seven of them were executed in Prague's Old Town Square on what came to be called the " Old Town Square execution ". Amongst those executed were Kryštof Harant and Jan Jesenius . Today, 27 crosses have been laid into the cobblestones as a tribute to those executed. An estimated five-sixths of the Bohemian nobility went into exile soon after the Battle of White Mountain, and their properties were confiscated.

[ 13 ] There remained a strong Protestant army in Silesia under the command of Johann Georg von Brandenburg , Duke of Krnov , which continued fighting the Imperial army in Moravia and in what today is Slovakia until 1623.

In 1621, the Emperor ordered all Calvinists and other non-Lutherans to leave the realm in three days or to convert to Catholicism.

[ citation needed ] In 1622, he forbade practice of the Lutheran faith. In 1626, he ordered all Lutherans (most of whom had not been involved in the revolt) to convert or else leave the country.

[ 14 ] By 1627, Archbishop Harrach of Prague and Jaroslav Borzita of Martinice set out to convert the heretics, as they were termed, by peaceful means; most Bohemians converted, but a significant Protestant minority remained.

Spanish troops, seeking to encircle their rebellious Dutch provinces, seized the Palatinate lands . With the prospect of Protestantism being overrun in Germany , Denmark entered the struggle. Sweden was to join the Protestant forces in 1630.

The population in the Lands of the Bohemian Crown declined by about a third until the end of the war.

[ 15 ] The result of the 1620 battle brought two centuries of re catholicization of the Czech lands and the decline of the Czech-speaking aristocracy and elite as well as the Czech language (accompanied with the growing influence of German-speaking elites), a process that was slowed by the Czech National Revival starting in the late 18th century. Czech nationalist historians and writers such as Alois Jirásek have referred to the 17th and 18th century in the Czech lands as the Dark Age.

See also [ edit ] Letohrádek Hvězda References [ edit ] ^ a b Wilson 2009 , pp. 304, 306.

^ a b Wilson 2009 , p. 306.

^ The Battle of White Mountain , 11-06-2003 – Radio Praguel.

^ Johnson, Lonnie. Central Europe enemies, neighbours, friends. New York: Oxford UP, 1996. Print.

^ Helfferich, Tryntje.

The Thirty Years' War : A Documentary History. Indianapolis: Hackett Company, Inc., 2009. Print.

^ Guthrie, William P. Battles of the Thirty Years' War from White Mountain to Nordlingen, 1618–1635. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 2001. Print.

^ "Thinkers at War – Descartes | Military History Matters" . 21 March 2014.

^ a b Marshall, Andrew (8 November 2020).

"What was the Battle of White Mountain (1620)? - Boot Camp & Military Fitness Institute" .

bootcampmilitaryfitnessinstitute.com .

Archived from the original on 29 June 2022 . Retrieved 27 March 2025 .

^ "WHITE MOUNTAIN - War History" .

warhistory.org . 10 November 2015 . Retrieved 27 March 2025 .

^ "The Battle of White Mountain, 1620" .

Warfare History Network .

Archived from the original on 26 January 2025 . Retrieved 27 March 2025 .

^ Jana (9 December 2024).

"The Battle of White Mountain" .

Our Beautiful Prague . Retrieved 27 March 2025 .

^ Guthrie, William P.

Battles of the Thirty Years' War from White Mountain to Nordlingen, 1618–1635 . Westport, CT: Greenwood, 2001. Print.

[ ISBN missing ] [ page needed ] ^ Consequences of Czech Defeat Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine , U.S. Library of Congress ^ Wedgwood, C. V.

(1964) [1938].

The Thirty Years' War . London: Jonathan Cape . pp. 158, 224.

^ Wilson 2009 , p. 788.

Sources [ edit ] The History of the Thirty Years' War by Friedrich Schiller Luca Cristini , 1618–1648 la guerra dei 30 anni. volume 1 da 1618 al 1632 2007 ( ISBN 978-88-903010-1-8 ) Luca Cristini , 1618–1648 la guerra dei 30 anni. volume 2 da 1632 al 1648 2007 ( ISBN 978-88-903010-2-5 ) Bohemia in history . Cambridge, U.K: Cambridge UP, 1998. Print.

Helfferich, Tryntje .

The Thirty Years' War: A Documentary History . Indianapolis: Hackett Company, Inc., 2009. Print.

Josef V. Polisensky , Thirty Years' War , University of California Press (June 1971); La guerra dei trent'anni: da un conflitto locale a una guerra europea nella prima metà del Seicento – Torino: Einaudi, 1982.

Tomáš Kleisner , Giovanni Pietro de Pomis Medal of the Battle of the White Mountain Wilson, Peter H. (2009).

Europe's Tragedy: A History of the Thirty Years' War . Allen Lane.

ISBN 978-0-7139-9592-3 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Battle of White Mountain .

Johnson, L. (1996).

Central Europe: Enemies, Neighbors, Friends: Enemies, Neighbors, Friends . Oxford University Press, US.

ISBN 9780198026075 .

Guthrie, W.P. (2002).

Battles of the Thirty Years' War: From White Mountain to Nordlingen, 1618–1635 . Greenwood Press.

ISBN 9780313320286 .

Teich, M. (1998).

Bohemia in History . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521431552 .

Helfferich, T. (2009).

The Thirty Years' War: A Documentary History . Hackett Publishing.

ISBN 9781603843638 .

Bellum.cz – "Battle of White Mountain 8th November 1620" Kafkadesk.org - "...in 1620: the Bohemian estates were defeated at the Battle of White Mountain" v t e Spanish Empire Timeline–immersed Catholic Monarchs Conquest of the Americas , Asia and the Pacific Treaty of Tordesillas Italian Wars Habsburgs Golden Age War of the League of Cognac Encomiendas New Laws in favour of the indigenous Expulsion of the Moriscos Ottoman–Habsburg wars French Wars of Religion Bruneian–Spanish conflict Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604) Piracy in the Caribbean Eighty Years' War Spanish–Moro conflict Thirty Years' War Franco-Spanish War (1635–1659) Portuguese Restoration War War of the Spanish Succession Queen Anne's War Bourbons Bourbon Reforms War of Jenkins' Ear Treaty of Madrid (1750) Seven Years' War Nootka Convention Napoleonic invasion Third Treaty of San Ildefonso Independence of Spanish continental Americas Adams–Onís Treaty Liberal constitution Carlist Wars Spanish–American War German–Spanish Treaty (1899) Spanish Civil War Independence of Morocco Independence of Equatorial Guinea Western Sahara conflict Territories Europe Spain Crown of Castille Crown of Aragon Union with Portugal Gibraltar Southern Italy (Kingdoms of Naples , Sicily and Sardinia ) Milan Union with Holy Roman Empire Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, northernmost France Franche-Comté Pyrénées-Orientales Americas ( Spanish America ) North America New Spain ( Coastal Alaska , Central United States ( Spanish Louisiana ), Western United States ( Spanish Texas ), Florida , Mexico , Central America ( Captaincy General of Yucatan ), Spanish Caribbean ) Central America Captaincy General of Guatemala Spanish West Indies ( Cuba , Dominican Republic , Puerto Rico ) Trinidad Jamaica Haiti Aruba Curazao Bonaire Belize South America New Granada ( Colombia , Ecuador , Panama , Venezuela, part of Guyana , a northernmost portion of Brazilian Amazon) Peru (Peru, Acre , Chile ) Río de la Plata ( Argentina , Paraguay , Charcas (Bolivia), Banda Oriental (Uruguay), Misiones Orientales , Malvinas ) Asia and Oceania ( Spanish East Indies ) Philippines Micronesia ( Caroline , Guam , Mariana , Micronesia , Palau ) Northern Taiwan Tidore Africa Equatorial Guinea Northern Africa ( Western Sahara , Spanish Morocco , Tripoli , Tunis , Peñón of Algiers , Oran , Béjaïa , Ifni and Cape Juby ) Antarctica Terra Australis Administration Organization Ayuntamiento Cabildo Council of the Indies Germania Santa Hermandad Law Exequatur Laws of the Indies Papal bull Royal Decree of Graces School of Salamanca Trial of residence Titles and positions Alcalde Corregidor Municipal president Regidor Syndic Vecino Administrative subdivisions Viceroyalties Columbian New Spain New Granada Perú Río de la Plata Captaincies General Chile Cuba Guatemala Philippines Provincias Internas Puerto Rico Santo Domingo Venezuela Yucatán Governorates Castilla de Oro Cuba La Florida Louisiana New Andalusia (1501–1513) New Andalusia New Castile New Navarre New Spain Tierra Firme New Toledo New León Paraguay Río de la Plata Terra Australis Audiencias Bogotá Buenos Aires Caracas Charcas Concepción Cusco Guadalajara Guatemala Lima Manila Mexico Panamá Quito Santiago Santo Domingo Economy Currencies Dollar (Peso) Real Maravedí Escudo Columnario Doubloon Trade Manila galleon Spanish treasure fleet Casa de Contratación Spanish Road Guipuzcoan Company of Caracas Barcelona Trading Company Consulate of the Sea Camino Real de Tierra Adentro Commerce Consulate of Buenos Aires Military Armies Tercio Army of Flanders Free Company of Volunteers of Catalonia Indian auxiliaries Spanish Armada Ships of the line Royalists Legión Army of Africa Strategists Duke of Alba Antonio de Leyva Martín de Goiti Alfonso d'Avalos García de Toledo Osorio Duke of Savoy Álvaro de Bazán the Elder John of Austria Charles Bonaventure de Longueval Pedro de Zubiaur Ambrosio Spinola Blas de Lezo Bernardo de Gálvez Mariners Christopher Columbus Pinzón brothers Ferdinand Magellan Juan Sebastián Elcano Juan de la Cosa Juan Ponce de León Miguel López de Legazpi Pedro Menéndez de Avilés Sebastián de Ocampo Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca Alonso de Ojeda Vasco Núñez de Balboa Alonso de Salazar Andrés de Urdaneta Antonio de Ulloa Ruy López de Villalobos Diego Columbus Alonso de Ercilla Nicolás de Ovando Juan de Ayala Sebastián Vizcaíno Juan Fernández Luis Fajardo Felipe González de Ahedo Francisco de Camargo Alonso de Camargo Conquistadors Hernán Cortés Francisco Pizarro Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada Hernán Pérez de Quesada Francisco Vázquez de Coronado Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar Pedro de Valdivia Gaspar de Portolà Pere Fages i Beleta Joan Orpí Pedro de Alvarado Martín de Ursúa Diego de Almagro Pánfilo de Narváez Diego de Mazariegos Jerónimo Luis de Cabrera Pere d'Alberní i Teixidor García López de Cárdenas Notable battles Old World Won Comuneros Bicocca Rome (1527) Landriano Pavia Tunis Mühlberg St. Quentin Gravelines Malta Lepanto Antwerp Azores Mons Gembloux Ostend English Armada Cape Celidonia White Mountain Breda Nördlingen Valenciennes Ceuta Bitonto Bailén Vitoria Tetouan Alhucemas Lost Capo d'Orso Vienna (1529) Preveza Siege of Castelnuovo Algiers Ceresole Balearic Islands (1558) Djerba Tunis Spanish Armada Leiden Rocroi Downs Montes Claros Passaro Manila Bay Trafalgar Somosierra Annual Mactan New World Won Tenochtitlan Cajamarca Cusco Bogotá savanna Penco Mataquito Guadalupe Island Recife San Juan (1595) Bahia Colonia del Sacramento Comuneros (Paraguay) Cartagena de Indias Cuerno Verde Túpac Amaru II Túpac Katari Pensacola Newfoundland San Juan (1797) Lost La Noche Triste Iguape Tucapel Guiana Curalaba Comuneros (New Granada) Trinidad (1797) Chacabuco Boyacá Carabobo Pichincha Ayacucho Guam Santiago de Cuba Asomante Spanish conquests Canary Islands The Americas Aztec Maya Chiapas Yucatán Guatemala Petén El Salvador Honduras Nicaragua Chibchan Nations Colombia Chile Inca Philippines Other civil topics Spanish missions in the Americas Architecture Mesoamerican Codices Cusco painting tradition Indochristian painting in New Spain Quito painting tradition Africanist Tapada limeña Academia Antártica Colonial universities in Hispanic America Colonial universities in the Philippines General Archive of the Indies Colonial Spanish Horse Mustang Castas Criollos in the colonial society Old inquisition Slavery in Spanish Empire Asiento Law of coartación (which allowed slaves to buy their freedom, and that of others) Great Potosí Mint Fraud of 1649 Cartography Cartographers Juan de la Cruz Cano y Olmedilla Agustín Ibáñez y Bojons Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Battle_of_White_Mountain&oldid=1305555626 " Categories : Bohemian Revolt Conflicts in 1620 Military history of Prague 1620 in Europe 1620 in the Habsburg monarchy 1620 in the Holy Roman Empire Battles of the Thirty Years' War involving Bohemia Battles of the Thirty Years' War involving Spain Battles of the Thirty Years' War involving the Holy Roman Empire Battles of the Thirty Years' War involving the Palatinate Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Pages with missing ISBNs Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from June 2023 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2018 Articles containing Czech-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing German-language text Articles needing additional references from November 2017 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 19:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Battle of White Mountain 46 languages Add topic

