Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Agreement 2 Types Toggle Types subsection 2.1 Intransitive verbs 2.2 Transitive verbs 2.3 Ditransitive verbs 2.4 Double transitive verbs 2.5 Copular verbs 3 Valency Toggle Valency subsection 3.1 Impersonal and objective verbs 3.2 Valency marking 4 Tense, aspect, and modality Toggle Tense, aspect, and modality subsection 4.1 Tense 4.2 Aspect 4.3 Mood and modality 5 Voice 6 Non-finite forms 7 See also Toggle See also subsection 7.1 Verbs in various languages 7.2 Grammar 7.3 Other 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Bibliography 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Verb 160 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch Anarâškielâ العربية Aragonés Asturianu Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk Davvisámegiella Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 Gungbe 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Къарачай-малкъар ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча ລາວ Latgaļu Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Мокшень Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu Перем коми ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Ποντιακά Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Scots Seeltersk Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Тыва дыл Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Walon 文言 Winaray 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Kadazandusun ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of speech that conveys an action This article is about the part of speech. For the physical activity program, see VERB (program) . For English usage of verbs, see English verbs . For the radio programme, see The Verb .

A verb is a word that generally conveys an action ( bring , read , walk , run , learn ), an occurrence ( happen , become ), or a state of being ( be , exist , stand ). In the usual description of English , the basic form, with or without the particle to , is the infinitive . In many languages , verbs are inflected (modified in form) to encode tense , aspect , mood , and voice . A verb may also agree with the person , gender or number of some of its arguments , such as its subject , or object . In English, three tenses exist: present , to indicate that an action is being carried out; past , to indicate that an action has been done; and future , to indicate that an action will be done, expressed with the auxiliary verb will or shall .

For example: Lucy will go to school.

(action, future) Barack Obama became the President of the United States in 2009.

(occurrence, past) Mike Trout is a center fielder.

(state of being, present) Every language discovered so far makes some form of noun -verb distinction, [ 1 ] possibly because of the graph-like nature of communicated meaning by humans, i.e. nouns being the "entities" and verbs being the "links" between them.

[ 2 ] The word verb comes from Latin verbum ' word or verb ' ) and shares the same Indo-European root as word.

[ 3 ] Agreement Main article: Grammatical conjugation In languages where the verb is inflected, it often agrees with its primary argument (the subject) in person, number or gender. With the exception of the verb to be , English shows distinctive agreements only in the third person singular, present tense form of verbs, which are marked by adding "-s" ( walk s ) or "-es" ( fish es ). The rest of the persons are not distinguished in the verb ( I walk , you walk , they walk , etc.).

Latin and the Romance languages inflect verbs for tense–aspect–mood (abbreviated 'TAM'), and they agree in person and number (but not in gender, as for example in Polish ) with the subject.

Japanese , like many languages with SOV word order, inflects verbs for tense-aspect-mood, as well as other categories such as negation, but shows absolutely no agreement with the subject—it is a strictly dependent-marking language . On the other hand, Basque , Georgian , and some other languages, have polypersonal agreement : the verb agrees with the subject, the direct object, and even the secondary object if present, a greater degree of head-marking than is found in most European languages.

Types Verbs vary by type, and each type is determined by the kinds of words that accompany it and the relationship those words have with the verb itself. Classified by the number of their valency arguments, usually four basic types are distinguished: intransitives, transitives, ditransitives and double transitive verbs. Some verbs have special grammatical uses and hence complements, such as copular verbs (i.e., be ); the verb do used for do -support in questioning and negation; and tense or aspect auxiliaries, e.g., be , have or can . In addition, verbs can be non-finite (not inflected for person, number, tense, etc.), such special forms as infinitives , participles or gerunds .

[ 4 ] Intransitive verbs An intransitive verb is one that does not have a direct object. Intransitive verbs may be followed by an adverb (a word that addresses how, where, when, and how often) or end a sentence. For example: "The woman spoke softly." "The athlete ran faster than the official." "The boy wept ." Transitive verbs A transitive verb is followed by a noun or noun phrase . These noun phrases are not called predicate nouns, but are instead called direct objects because they refer to the object that is being acted upon. For example: "My friend read the newspaper." "The teenager earned a speeding ticket." A way to identify a transitive verb is to invert the sentence, making it passive. For example: "The newspaper was read by my friend." "A speeding ticket was earned by the teenager." Ditransitive verbs Ditransitive verbs (sometimes called Vg verbs after the verb give ) precede either two noun phrases or a noun phrase and then a prepositional phrase often led by to or for . For example: "The players gave their teammates high fives." "The players gave high fives to their teammates." When two noun phrases follow a transitive verb, the first is an indirect object, that which is receiving something, and the second is a direct object, that being acted upon. Indirect objects can be noun phrases or prepositional phrases.

[ 5 ] Double transitive verbs Double transitive verbs (sometimes called Vc verbs after the verb consider ) are followed by a noun phrase that serves as a direct object and then a second noun phrase, adjective, or infinitive phrase. The second element (noun phrase, adjective, or infinitive) is called a complement, which completes a clause that would not otherwise have the same meaning. For example: "The young couple considers the neighbors wealthy people." "Some students perceive adults quite inaccurately." "Sarah deemed her project to be the hardest she has ever completed." Copular verbs Copular verbs ( a.k.a.

linking verbs) include be , seem , become , appear , look , and remain . For example: "Her daughter was a writing tutor." "The singers were very nervous." "His mother looked worried." "Josh remained a reliable friend." These verbs precede nouns or adjectives in a sentence, which become predicate nouns and predicate adjectives.

[ 6 ] Copulae are thought to 'link' the predicate adjective or noun to the subject. They can also be followed by an adverb of place, which is sometimes referred to as a predicate adverb. For example: "My house is down the street." The main copular verb be is manifested in eight forms be , is , am , are , was , were , been , and being in English.

Valency Main article: Valency (linguistics) The number of arguments that a verb takes is called its valency or valence . Verbs can be classified according to their valency: Avalent (valency = 0): the verb has neither a subject nor an object. Zero valency does not occur in English; in some languages such as Mandarin Chinese , weather verbs like snow(s) take no subject or object.

Intransitive (valency = 1, monovalent): the verb only has a subject . For example: "he runs", "it falls".

Transitive (valency = 2, divalent): the verb has a subject and a direct object . For example: "she eats fish", "we hunt nothing".

Ditransitive (valency = 3, trivalent): the verb has a subject, a direct object, and an indirect object. For example: "He gives her a flower" or "She gave John the watch." A few English verbs, particularly those concerned with financial transactions, take four arguments, as in "Pat 1 sold Chris 2 a lawnmower 3 for $20 4 " or "Chris 1 paid Pat 2 $20 3 for a lawnmower 4 ".

[ 7 ] Impersonal and objective verbs Weather verbs often appear to be impersonal (subjectless, or avalent) in null-subject languages like Spanish , where the verb llueve means "It rains". In English, French and German, they require a dummy pronoun and therefore formally have a valency of 1. As verbs in Spanish incorporate the subject as a TAM suffix, Spanish is not actually a null-subject language, unlike Mandarin (see above). Such verbs in Spanish also have a valency of 1.

Intransitive and transitive verbs are the most common, but the impersonal and objective verbs are somewhat different from the norm. In the objective, the verb takes an object but no subject; the nonreferent subject in some uses may be marked in the verb by an incorporated dummy pronoun similar to that used with the English weather verbs. Impersonal verbs in null subject languages take neither subject nor object, as is true of other verbs, but again the verb may show incorporated dummy pronouns despite the lack of subject and object phrases.

Valency marking Verbs are often flexible with regard to valency. In non-valency marking languages such as English, a transitive verb can often drop its object and become intransitive; or an intransitive verb can take an object and become transitive. For example, in English the verb move has no grammatical object in he moves (though in this case, the subject itself may be an implied object, also expressible explicitly as in he moves himself ); but in he moves the car , the subject and object are distinct and the verb has a different valency. Some verbs in English have historically derived forms that show change of valency in some causative verbs, such as fall-fell-fallen : fell-felled-felled ; rise-rose-risen : raise-raised-raised ; cost-cost-cost : cost-costed-costed .

In valency marking languages, valency change is shown by inflecting the verb in order to change the valency. In Kalaw Lagaw Ya of Australia, for example, verbs distinguish valency by argument agreement suffixes and TAM endings: Nui mangema "He arrived earlier today" ( mangema today past singular subject active intransitive perfective) Palai mangemanu "They [dual] arrived earlier today" Thana mangemainu "They [plural] arrived earlier today" Verb structure: manga-i-[number]-TAM "arrive+active+singular/dual/plural+TAM" Nuidh wapi manganu "He took the fish [to that place] earlier today" ( manganu today past singular object attainative transitive perfective) Nuidh wapi mangamanu "He took the two fish [to that place] earlier today" Nuidh wapi mangamainu "He took the [three or more] fish [to that place] earlier today" Verb structure: manga-Ø-[number]-TAM "arrive+attainative+singular/dual/plural+TAM" The verb stem manga- 'to take/come/arrive' at the destination takes the active suffix -i (> mangai- ) in the intransitive form, and as a transitive verb the stem is not suffixed. The TAM ending -nu is the general today past attainative perfective, found with all numbers in the perfective except the singular active, where -ma is found.

Tense, aspect, and modality Main articles: Grammatical tense , Aspect (linguistics) , Linguistic modality , and Tense–aspect–mood A single-word verb in Spanish contains information about time (past, present, future), person and number. The process of grammatically modifying a verb to express this information is called conjugation .

Depending on the language, verbs may express grammatical tense , aspect , or modality .

Tense Grammatical tense [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] is the use of auxiliary verbs or inflections to convey whether the action or state is before, simultaneous with, or after some reference point.  The reference point could be the time of utterance , in which case the verb expresses absolute tense , or it could be a past, present, or future time of reference previously established in the sentence, in which case the verb expresses relative tense .

Aspect Aspect [ 9 ] [ 11 ] expresses how the action or state occurs through time. Important examples include: perfective aspect , in which the action is viewed in its entirety through completion (as in "I saw the car") imperfective aspect , in which the action is viewed as ongoing; in some languages a verb could express imperfective aspect more narrowly as: habitual aspect, in which the action occurs repeatedly (as in "I used to go there every day"), or continuous aspect , in which the action occurs without pause; continuous aspect can be further subdivided into stative aspect , in which the situation is a fixed, unevolving state (as in "I know French"), and progressive aspect , in which the situation continuously evolves (as in "I am running") perfect , which combines elements of both aspect and tense and in which both a prior event and the state resulting from it are expressed (as in "he has gone there", i.e. "he went there and he is still there") discontinuous past , which combines elements of a past event and the implication that the state resulting from it was later reversed (as in "he did go there" or "he has been there", i.e. "he went there but has now come back") [ 12 ] Aspect can either be lexical , in which case the aspect is embedded in the verb's meaning (as in "the sun shines", where "shines" is lexically stative), or it can be grammatically expressed, as in "I am running." Mood and modality Modality [ 13 ] expresses the speaker's attitude toward the action or state given by the verb, especially with regard to degree of necessity, obligation, or permission ("You must go", "You should go", "You may go"), determination or willingness ("I will do this no matter what"), degree of probability ("It must be raining by now", "It may be raining", "It might be raining"), or ability ("I can speak French"). All languages can express modality with adverbs , but some also use verbal forms as in the given examples. If the verbal expression of modality involves the use of an auxiliary verb, that auxiliary is called a modal verb . If the verbal expression of modality involves inflection, we have the special case of mood ; moods include the indicative (as in "I am there"), the subjunctive (as in "I wish I were there"), and the imperative ("Be there!").

Voice The voice [ 14 ] of a verb expresses whether the subject of the verb is performing the action of the verb or whether the action is being performed on the subject. The two most common voices are the active voice (as in "I saw the car") and the passive voice (as in "The car was seen by me" or simply "The car was seen").

Non-finite forms Main article: Non-finite verb Most languages have a number of verbal nouns that describe the action of the verb.

In the Indo-European languages, verbal adjectives are generally called participles . English has an active participle, also called a present participle; and a passive participle, also called a past participle. The active participle of break is breaking , and the passive participle is broken . Other languages have attributive verb forms with tense and aspect. This is especially common among verb-final languages , where attributive verb phrases act as relative clauses .

See also Linguistics Verbs in various languages Adyghe verbs Arabic verbs Ancient Greek verbs Basque verbs Bulgarian verbs Chinese verbs English verbs Finnish verb conjugation French verbs German verbs Germanic verbs Hebrew verb conjugation Hungarian verbs Ilokano verbs Irish verbs Italian verbs Japanese godan and ichidan verbs Japanese verb conjugations Korean verbs Latin verbs Persian verbs Portuguese verb conjugation Proto-Indo-European verb Romance verbs Romanian verbs Sanskrit verbs Sesotho verbs Slovene verbs Spanish verbs Tigrinya verbs Grammar Auxiliary verb Grammar Grammatical aspect Grammatical mood Grammatical tense Grammatical voice Performative utterance Phrasal verb Phrase structure rules Sentence (linguistics) Syntax Tense–aspect–mood Transitivity (grammatical category) Verb argument Verb framing Verbification Verb phrase Other Le Train de Nulle Part : A 233-page book without a single verb.

References ^ David Adger (2019).

Language Unlimited: The science behind our most creative power . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 78.

ISBN 978-0-19-882809-9 .

^ Silva, Vivian S.; Freitas, André; Handschuh, Siegfried.

"Building a Knowledge Graph from Natural Language Definitions for Interpretable Text Entailment Recognition" (PDF) .

ACL Anthology .

Archived (PDF) from the original on Oct 3, 2023.

^ "Verb, n. meanings, etymology and more" .

Oxford Dictionary . Retrieved 15 June 2025 .

^ Morenberg 2010 , pp. 6–14 ^ Morenberg 2010 , pp. 9–10 ^ Morenberg 2010 , p. 7 ^ Jackendoff 2002 , p. 135.

^ Comrie, Bernard, Tense , Cambridge Univ. Press, 1985.

^ a b Östen Dahl , Tense and Aspect Systems , Blackwell, 1985.

^ Fleischman, Suzanne, The Future in Thought and Action , Cambridge Univ. Press, 1982.

^ Comrie, Bernard, Aspect , Cambridge Univ. Press, 1976.

^ Plungian, Vladimir A.

& Johan van der Auwera (2006), "Towards a typology of discontinuous past marking" . Sprachtypol. Univ. Forsch. (STUF), Berlin 59, 4, 317–349.

^ Palmer, F. R., Mood and Modality , Cambridge Univ. Press, 2001.

^ Klaiman, M. H., Grammatical Voice (Cambridge Studies in Linguistics) , Cambridge Univ. Press, 1991.

Bibliography Jackendoff, R. (2002).

Foundations of Language . Oxford University Press.

Morenberg, Max (2010).

Doing Grammar (Third ed.). Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-1997-3288-3 .

Further reading Goldenberg, Gideon "On Verbal Structure and the Hebrew Verb", in: idem, Studies in Semitic Linguistics , Jerusalem: Magnes Press 1998, pp. 148–196 [English translation; originally published in Hebrew in 1985].

External links Media related to Verbs at Wikimedia Commons The dictionary definition of verb at Wiktionary www.verbix.com Verbs and verb conjugation in many languages.

conjugation.com English Verb Conjugation.

Italian Verbs Coniugator and Analyzer Conjugation and Analysis of Regular and Irregular Verbs, and also of Neologisms, like googlare for to google .

El verbo en español Downloadable handbook to learn the Spanish verb paradigm in an easy ruled-based method. It also supplies the guidelines to know whenever a Spanish verb is regular or irregular v t e Lexical categories and their features Noun Abstract / Concrete Adjectival Agent Animacy Bare Collective Countable Initial-stress-derived Mass Noun adjunct Proper Relational Strong / Weak Verbal Verb Forms Attributive Converb Finite / Nonfinite Gerund Gerundive Infinitive Participle Supine Transgressive Verbal noun Types Ambitransitive Andative / Venitive Anticausative Autocausative Auxiliary Captative Catenative Compound Copular Defective Denominal Deponent Ditransitive Dynamic Exceptional case-marking Frequentative Germanic strong Germanic weak Impersonal Inchoative Intransitive Labile Lexical Light Modal Negative Performative Phrasal Predicative Preterite-present Pure Reflexive Regular / Irregular Separable Stative Stretched Transitive Unaccusative Unergative Adjective Anti-intersective Collateral Common Demonstrative Intersective Nominalized Non-intersective Possessive Postpositive Proper Pure intersective Relative subsective Subsective Adverb Conjunctive Flat Genitive Interrogative Locative Prepositional Pronominal Relative Pronoun Bound variable Demonstrative Disjunctive Distributive Donkey Dummy Formal / Informal Gender-neutral / Gender-specific Inclusive / Exclusive Indefinite Intensive Interrogative Personal Possessive Reciprocal Reflexive Relative Resumptive Strong / Weak Subject / Object / Prepositional Adposition Casally modulated Inflected Stranded Determiner Article Demonstrative Interrogative Possessive Quantifier Particle Discourse Interrogative Modal Noun Possessive Other Classifier Measure word Complementizer Conjunction Copula Coverb Interjection Ideophone Onomatopoeia Preverb Procedure word Pro-form Pro-verb / Pro-sentence Prop-word Syntax–semantics interface Yes and no v t e Verbs of the world's languages Phonologies Orthographies Grammars Adjectives Determiners Nouns Prepositions Pronouns Verbs Indo-European ( proto-language ) Germanic ( strong and weak ) English auxiliary modal Dutch conjugation German conjugation Gothic Celtic Irish conjugation Italic Latin conjugation tenses Romance Catalan conjugation auxiliary verbs French conjugation morphology Italian conjugation Occitan conjugation Portuguese conjugation Romanian Sardinian conjugation Spanish conjugation irregularity Slavic Bulgarian conjugation Czech conjugation morphology Macedonian conjugation Slovene Iranian Persian Indo-Aryan Hindustani Sanskrit Other Armenian Greek pure verbs Uralic Finnish conjugation Hungarian Turkic Turkish Other European Adyghe Basque Georgian conjugation Kabardian Afroasiatic ( Derived stem ) Arabic Hebrew Tigrinya Niger–Congo Chichewa tenses Sotho deficient verbs Japonic Japanese conjugation Kagoshima dialect godan and ichidan irregular verbs Other East Asian Korean Austronesian Ilocano Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐5cf8f5fb49‐zpl8w
Cached time: 20250811235547
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.387 seconds
Real time usage: 0.502 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2186/1000000
Revision size: 20722/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 65490/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1740/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 45110/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.233/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8441158/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  406.376      1 -total
 22.70%   92.237      1 Template:Reflist
 17.68%   71.861      3 Template:Cite_book
 16.94%   68.820      1 Template:Lexical_categories
 16.77%   68.160      2 Template:Navbox
 13.04%   52.979      1 Template:Short_description
  9.12%   37.076      1 Template:Authority_control
  7.86%   31.940      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.91%   24.034      1 Template:Ety
  5.36%   21.797      1 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:37354:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235547 and revision id 1295689393. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Verb&oldid=1295689393 " Categories : Verbs Parts of speech Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 June 2025, at 07:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Verb 160 languages Add topic

