Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 X-linked patterns of inheritance 3 X-linked dominant inheritance Toggle X-linked dominant inheritance subsection 3.1 Frequency and patterns of inheritance 4 X-linked recessive inheritance 5 X-linked diseases Toggle X-linked diseases subsection 5.1 X-linked dominant diseases 5.1.1 Alport syndrome 5.1.2 Fragile X syndrome 5.1.3 Rett syndrome 5.1.4 X-linked hypophosphatemia (vitamin D resistant rickets) 5.2 X-linked recessive diseases 5.2.1 Duchenne muscular dystrophy 5.2.2 X-linked agammaglobulinemia 5.2.3 Red-green colour blindness 5.2.4 Hemophilia A 6 Screening for genetic diseases Toggle Screening for genetic diseases subsection 6.1 Carrier screening 6.2 Prenatal screening 6.3 Newborn screening 7 Y-linked inheritance Toggle Y-linked inheritance subsection 7.1 The Y chromosome 7.2 The SRY gene 7.3 Y-linked inheritance 7.4 Y-linked disorders 7.4.1 Overview 7.4.2 Hypertrichosis 7.4.3 Webbed toes 7.5 Infertility in biological males 7.5.1 Overview 7.5.2 Prevalence of Y chromosome Infertility 7.5.3 Etiology of Y chromosome Infertility 8 Sex chromosome aneuploidy 9 Sex-linkage in animals 10 History Toggle History subsection 10.1 Discovery of sex chromosomes 10.2 Discovery of X-linked inheritance 10.3 Discovery of X-inactivation 11 Related terms Toggle Related terms subsection 11.1 Sex-influenced traits 11.2 Sex-limited traits 12 See also 13 References Toggle the table of contents Sex linkage 24 languages العربية বাংলা Bosanski Català Čeština Ελληνικά Español Euskara Gaeilge 한국어 Italiano עברית 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sex-specific patterns of inheritance Sex linkage describes the sex-specific patterns of inheritance and expression when a gene is present on a sex chromosome (allosome) rather than a non-sex chromosome ( autosome ).  Genes situated on the X-chromosome are thus termed X-linked, and are transmitted by both males and females, while genes situated on the Y-chromosome are termed Y-linked, and are transmitted by males only.  As human females possess two X-chromosomes and human males possess one X-chromosome and one Y-chromosome, the phenotype of a sex-linked trait can differ between males and females due to the differential number of alleles (polymorphisms) possessed for a given gene.  In humans, sex-linked patterns of inheritance are termed X-linked recessive , X-linked dominant and Y-linked . The inheritance and presentation of all three differ depending on the sex of both the parent and the child. This makes sex-linked patterns of inheritance characteristically different from autosomal dominance and recessiveness .

[ 1 ] This article will discuss each of these patterns of inheritance, as well as diseases that commonly arise through these sex-linked patterns of inheritance.  Variation in these inheritance patterns arising from aneuploidy of sex chromosomes, sex-linkage in non-human animals, and the history of the discovery of sex-linked inheritance are briefly introduced.

Background [ edit ] In humans (and mammals in general), biological sex is determined by genetics; however this is not the case for all animals, for instance, the biological sex of some reptiles is environmentally determined, and the sex of some worms is dependent on location.

[ 2 ] 22 of the 23 pairs of human chromosomes are autosomal (not involved in sex determination), while the 23rd pair of human chromosomes are the sex chromosomes.  The possession of two X-chromosomes defines a biological female, while the possession of one X and one Y chromosome defines a biological male.

[ 3 ] The two sex chromosomes differ in size and gene content, and unlike the sets of autosomal chromosomes, are not homologous.  The X-chromosome contains an estimated 1400 genes, most of which are involved in tissue development and the development of human disorders.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The Y-chromosome is host to the SRY gene, which is involved in the development of several male sex characteristics, while the identified functions of many of the remaining approximately 200 genes on the Y-chromosome are associated with human disease.

[ 6 ] Sex linkage thus refers to the association of a trait encoded by one of the genes on these sex chromosomes.  There are many more X-linked conditions than Y-linked conditions due to the larger size of the X-chromosome and greater number of genes encoded within it.

[ 1 ] In classical genetics , a mating experiment called a reciprocal cross is performed to test if an animal's trait is sex-linked.

[ 7 ] X-linked patterns of inheritance [ edit ] A disease or trait determined by a gene on the X-chromosome demonstrates X-linked inheritance.  Historically, X-linked inheritance has been divided into the patterns of X-linked dominant inheritance and X-linked recessive inheritance as synonymous with classical Mendelian inheritance of genes on autosomal chromosomes.

[ 8 ] However, more recently scholars have suggested the discontinuation of the use of the terms dominant and recessive when referring to X-linked inheritance, stating that the highly variable penetrance of X-linked traits in females as a result of mechanisms such as skewed X-inactivation or somatic mosaicism is difficult to reconcile with standard definitions of dominance and recessiveness.

[ 9 ] (A) (B) (C) Illustration of some X-linked heredity outcomes (A) the affected father has one X-linked dominant allele, the mother is homozygous for the recessive allele: only daughters (all) will be affected. (B) the affected mother is heterozygous with one copy of the X-linked dominant allele: both daughters and sons will have 50% probability to be affected. (C) the heterozygous mother is called "carrier" because she has one copy of the recessive allele: sons will have 50% probability to be affected, 50% of unaffected daughters will become carriers like their mother.

[ 10 ] X-linked dominant inheritance [ edit ] The phenotype of an X-linked dominant trait is exhibited by both males and females, and requires only one copy of the affected allele.

X-linked dominant inheritance is the pattern by which a trait encoded by an allele on the X-chromosome is passed down through generations, wherefore only one copy of that allele is sufficient for an individual to be affected ( dominance ).

[ 11 ] Unlike with X-linked recessive traits, females are more often affected by X-linked dominant traits than males as females have two X-chromosomes as opposed to one.  Moreover, some X-linked dominant conditions (for example, Aicardi syndrome ) are embryonically or neonatally lethal in hemizygous males (XY), and thus can be seen to only affect heterozygous females, who experience less severe symptoms.

[ 12 ] Frequency and patterns of inheritance [ edit ] In X-linked dominant inheritance, the transmission of the gene depends on the genotype of each of the parents.  A mother heterozygous for an X-linked dominant trait will be affected, and half of her children (whether female or male) will inherit her affected X-chromosome and be affected themselves, assuming an unaffected father.  Of the children of a father affected by an X-linked dominant trait and an unaffected mother, all daughters will be affected (having inherited their father's only affected X-chromosome), while no sons will be affected (having received their father's Y-chromosome).  A child affected by an X-linked dominant condition will always have at least one affected parent, and an affected son will always have an affected mother.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] X-linked recessive inheritance [ edit ] In X-linked recessive inheritance, males can only inherit the trait from the mother, and females can be carriers as a result of a carrier mother or affected father.

X-linked recessive inheritance describes one of the patterns of inheritance of genetic traits or disorders encoded by an allele (version of a gene) situated on the X-chromosome.  In X-linked recessive inheritance, females (XX) must have two copies of the allele (homozygous), while males (XY) require only one copy of the allele (hemizygous) to display the phenotype.  Thus, it is far more common for males to be affected by X-linked recessive traits.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] A female heterozygous for an X-linked recessive trait is considered a carrier .

[ 17 ] While a carrier female most often does not display the phenotype, rare cases of skewed X-chromosome inactivation , can lead to varied levels of expression.  This would occur when, during the normal process of inactivating half of a female's X-chromosomes, inactivation preferentially targets X-chromosomes inherited from a single parent,  thus the remaining active X-chromosomes from the other parent are disproportionately expressed.

[ 18 ] There are characteristic patterns for X-linked recessive inheritance.  As each parent contributes one sex chromosome to their offspring, sons cannot receive the X-linked trait from affected fathers, who provide only a Y-chromosome.  Consequently, affected males must inherit the X-linked recessive trait from their mothers.  Sons of a healthy carrier female have a 50% change of being affected, while sons of an affected female will always be affected.  Females must inherit a X-linked recessive allele from each parent.  All daughters of an affected father and healthy non-carrier mother will be carriers.  Daughters of an affected father and carrier mother will have a 50% chance of being affected, and daughters of two affected parents will always be affected.

[ 17 ] [ 19 ] While there is no male-to-male transmission of X-linked recessive traits, an affected male can pass his recessive X allele to a grandson through his unaffected carrier daughter.

[ 15 ] X-linked diseases [ edit ] X-linked dominant diseases [ edit ] Aicardi syndrome Alport syndrome [ 20 ] (majority of cases) Coffin–Lowry syndrome (CLS) Fragile-X syndrome Goltz syndrome Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism Incontinentia pigmenti [ 21 ] [ 22 ] Porphyria [ 23 ] (2-10% of cases) Rett syndrome (5% of cases) Vitamin D resistant rickets ( X-linked hypophosphatemia ) Alport syndrome [ edit ] Alport syndrome is a genetic disorder that primarily affects the kidneys by damaging the glomeruli, which are tiny filtering units inside the kidneys.

[ 24 ] It is caused by inherited mutations in the COL 4A3 , COL4A4 , and COL4A5 genes, which are responsible for producing type IV collagen .

[ 24 ] These mutations disrupt the formation of basement membranes, particularly in the kidneys , inner ears , and eyes , where this collagen network plays a key structural role.

[ 25 ] The specific gene affected determines the form of Alport syndrome: mutations in COL4A5 cause the X-linked form (XLAS), while mutations in COL4A3 or COL4A4, located on chromosome 2, are associated with autosomal recessive (ARAS) or autosomal dominant (ADAS) forms.

[ 26 ] Common signs and symptoms of Alport syndrome include hematuria (blood in urine), proteinuria (protein in urine), hearing loss, and eye abnormalities.

[ 27 ] Diagnosis typically involves urine and blood tests, hearing and vision assessments, and genetic testing to confirm the mutation and identify the specific type of Alport syndrome. Kidney biopsy can reveal a characteristic 'basketweave' appearance of the glomerular basement membrane under electron microscopy.

[ 28 ] In some cases, skin or kidney tissue may be tested for the absence of type IV collagen proteins.

Genetic testing is especially useful when biopsy is inconclusive or unavailable.

While there is no cure, treatments focus on slowing the progression of the kidney disease and managing symptoms.

ACE inhibitors are commonly used to control blood pressure and reduce proteinuria.

[ 29 ] If kidney failure develops, dialysis or kidney transplant is often effective. Rarely, transplant recipients may develop anti-GBM disease due to antibodies against type IV collagen.

[ 30 ] Fragile X syndrome [ edit ] Fragile X syndrome is a genetic neurodevelopmental disorder caused by a CGG trinucleotide repeat expansion in the FMR1 gene on the X chromosome .

[ 31 ] It is inherited in an X-linked dominant pattern and is the most common known inherited genetic cause of autism spectrum disorder .

[ 32 ] The condition affects approximately 1 in 3,600 males and 1 in 4,000 to 6,000 females.

[ 33 ] Fragile X syndrome occurs when the CGG repeat expansion exceeds 200 repeats, causing methylation and silencing of the FMR1 gene. This leads to a deficiency of FMRP, a protein essential for normal synaptic development and brain plasticity.

[ 32 ] Fragile X syndrome typically presents with learning disabilities to severe intellectual impairment , along with distinct physical features such as a long face, large or protruding ears , flat feet , and low muscle tone .

[ 32 ] Many individuals, especially males, also exhibit behavioural traits including social anxiety , hyperactivity , hand-flapping, and self-injurious behaviors such as biting. Females, who have two X chromosomes, are generally less severely affected due to X-inactivation.

[ 34 ] Diagnosis typically involves identifying a mutation in the FMR1 gene using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Southern blot analysis to measure CGG repeat expansions and methylation status.

[ 35 ] Earlier cytogenetic methods, such as detecting " fragile sites " on the X chromosome, have largely been replaced due to low reliability, particularly in females.

[ 36 ] Early diagnosis is important to support timely intervention and genetic counseling.

Rett syndrome [ edit ] Rett syndrome is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder that primarily affects females, with a prevalence of approximately 1 in 8,500.

[ 37 ] It is caused by mutations in the MECP2 gene located on the X chromosome and is inherited in an X-linked dominant pattern.

[ 37 ] However, the vast majority (over 99%) of cases result from de novo mutations , often from the paternal germline.

[ 38 ] Following a period of seemingly normal development, Rett syndrome progresses through four clinical stages. Stage I, or early-onset, typically begins between 6 and 18 months of age with subtle developmental delays.

[ 39 ] Stage II,  the rapid destructive phase, involves a sudden loss of purposeful hand use and spoken language, often accompanied by repetitive hand movements, breathing irregularities, and autistic-like behaviours.

[ 39 ] In Stage III, or the plateau phase, some behavioural improvements may occur, though motor dysfunction, apraxia , and seizures remain common.

[ 39 ] Stage IV, the late motor deterioration phase, is characterized by progressive loss of mobility and muscle rigidity, while communication and cognition generally stabilize.

[ 39 ] The condition is rarely seen in males, as those with MECP2 mutations typically do not survive infancy unless they have Klinefelter's syndrome or mosaicism .

[ 37 ] [ 40 ] In contrast, affected females often survive into middle age, with symptom severity influenced by the specific mutation and patterns of X-chromosome inactivation.

Diagnosis is based on clinical presentation and confirmed through genetic testing for MECP2 mutations once the established diagnostic criteria are met.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] While there is no cure, treatment focuses on managing symptoms with physical and speech therapy, medications for seizures, and supportive care.

[ 39 ] In 2023, trofinetide became the first medication approved in the United States specifically for Rett syndrome.

[ 43 ] X-linked hypophosphatemia (vitamin D resistant rickets) [ edit ] X-linked hypophosphatemia is a rare genetic form of rickets caused by mutations in the PHEX gene on the X chromosome.

[ 44 ] Unlike nutritional rickets, X-linked hypophosphatemia does not respond to vitamin D supplements. Instead, the PHEX mutation leads to overproduction of the hormone FGF23, which causes the kidneys to waste phosphate and impairs bone mineralization.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] Reduced PHEX enzyme activity allows the accumulation of osteopontin , a mineralization-inhibiting protein, to accumulate in bones and teeth.

[ 47 ] These combined effects result in soft bones (osteomalacia), dental issues (odontomalacia), short stature, and bow-leggedness.

[ 48 ] The condition affects approximately 1 in 20,000.

[ 49 ] Symptoms vary by age. In children, common signs include rickets , fatigue , delayed growth, craniostenosis (premature fusion of skull bones), and more.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] Adults may experience osteomalacia (soft bones), fractures or pseudofractures, dental abscesses, hearing loss, and joint pain.

[ 50 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] Diagnosis is based on clinical and biochemical findings, including low serum phosphate, elevated alkaline phosphatase, and excessive urinary phosphate loss.

[ 55 ] Treatment has traditionally included phosphate supplements and active vitamin D analogs.

[ 56 ] More recently, burosumab , a monoclonal antibody that targets FGF23, has been approved and shown to normalize phosphate levels and improve skeletal outcomes in both children and adults.

[ 57 ] X-linked recessive diseases [ edit ] The incidence of X-linked recessive conditions in females is the square of that in males. For example, if 1 in 20 males in a human population are red–green color blind , then 1 in 400 females in the population are expected to be color-blind ( 1 / 20 )*( 1 / 20 ). Examples include: Aarskog–Scott syndrome Adrenoleukodystrophy Bruton's agammaglobulinemia Color blindness Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome Congenital aqueductal stenosis ( hydrocephalus ) Duchenne muscular dystrophy Fabry disease Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency Haemophilia A and B Hunter syndrome Inherited nephrogenic diabetes insipidus Menkes disease (kinky hair syndrome) Ornithine carbamoyltransferase deficiency Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome Duchenne muscular dystrophy [ edit ] Duchenne muscular dystrophy is a severe neuromuscular disease causing progressive weakness and damage of muscle tissues , [ 58 ] leading to mobility loss and difficulties in daily activities. In a later stage of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, as respiratory and cardiac muscles start to degenerate, affected individuals are likely to develop complications such as respiratory failure , cardiomyopathy and heart failure .

[ 58 ] 1 in 3,600 male births worldwide are affected by Duchenne muscular dystrophy, moreover, it presents itself at around ages 2–4 and progressively worsens.  Most cases of Duchenne muscular dystrophy are inherited from the mother who is a carrier of the X-linked recessive trait, however, approximately 30% occur due to random mutations that are not inherited.

[ 59 ] Duchenne muscular dystrophy arises from a mutation, likely to be the deletion of the exons , [ 60 ] [ 61 ] a nucleotide sequence in the DMD gene that codes for dystrophin . Dystrophin is a protein responsible for strengthening and stabilizing muscle fibres.

[ 62 ] With the loss of the dystrophin complex, the muscle cells would no longer be protected and therefore result in progressive damage or degeneration. Although interventions vary case by case, corticosteroids are often used to delay the progressive degeneration of muscle cells.

[ 59 ] X-linked agammaglobulinemia [ edit ] X-linked agammaglobulinemia is a primary immunodeficiency disorder that impairs the body’s ability to produce antibodies , which are proteins protecting us from disease-causing antigens , resulting in severe bacterial infections .

[ 63 ] X-linked agammaglobulinemia is associated with a mutation in the Bruton's tyrosine kinase ( BTK ) gene, a cytoplasmic signalling molecule, on the X chromosome. The gene is responsible for producing BTK, an enzyme regulating B cells development and maturation within the bone marrow. It is also involved in the further development of the B cells that migrate into the secondary lymphoid tissues like the lymph nodes and spleen.

[ 64 ] B cells are a type of white blood cells essential in the production of antibodies, when at an early stage, called pre-B cells , they rely on expansion and survival signals involving BTK to mature.

[ 65 ] In affected individuals,  their BTK gene mutations can range from point mutations to indels that alter the amino acid sequence and the structure of BTK making it faulty.

[ 64 ] Therefore, the loss of BTK gene functions, prevents the maturation from pre-B cell to B cell lymphocytes hence, not able to differentiate into antibodies -producing plasma cells. With low antibodies, individuals are highly vulnerable to bacterial and viral infections.

[ 66 ] Red-green colour blindness [ edit ] Red-green colour blindness is a type of colour vision deficiency caused by a mutation in X-linked genes, affecting cone cells responsible for absorbing red or green light.

[ 67 ] Primarily affecting males (1 in 12) compared to females (1 in 200), as the condition requires all the X chromosomes to have the mutations.

[ 68 ] The perception of red and green light is attributed to the Long (L) and Medium (M) wavelength cones, respectively.

[ 69 ] In Red-green colour blindness, mutations take place on the OPN1LW which impairs L-cones, and OPN1MW genes, which impairs the medium cones [ 70 ] coding for the photopigments in the cones. In milder cases, those affected exhibit reduced sensitivity to red or green light, as a result of hybridization of the genes, [ 70 ] shifting the response of one cone towards that of the other.

[ 69 ] In the more extreme conditions, there is a deletion or replacement of the respective coding genes, [ 71 ] resulting in the absence of L or M cones photopigments and thus losing the ability to differentiate between red or green light completely.

Hemophilia A [ edit ] Haemophilia A is a blood clotting disease caused by a genetic defect in clotting factor VIII . It causes significant susceptibility to both internal and external bleeding.

[ 72 ] 1 in 5,617 live male births is affected, and the condition primarily affects males, while females are usually carriers with mild low clotting factor level symptoms, due to X-inactivation . The X-linked mutations are inherited from the mother, however, about ⅓ cases are mutations like point mutations or indels that have occurred spontaneously.

[ 73 ] Mutations in the F8 gene cause hemophilia A, while mutations in the F9 gene cause hemophilia. The F8 gene encodes for coagulation factor VIII , hence with missing proteins there cannot be effective clotting of the blood.

[ 74 ] Individuals having more severe haemophilia can experience more frequent and intense bleeding, and typically severe hemophilia A affects most patients. Patients with mild haemophilia often do not experience heavy bleeding except for surgeries and significant trauma.

[ 72 ] Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, is characterized by when the enzyme that helps red blood cells to work properly. Without the enzyme red blood cells will prematurely break down leading to hemolytic anemia . This is a condition that shows a low red blood cell count since the body cannot compensate for the quick degrading cells. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase is an enzyme that protects red blood cells from oxidative stress caused by reactive oxygen species , it will reduce the amount of ROS accumulation of ROS in the red blood cells. A mutation in the G6PD gene causes this deficiency, leaving the cells with no protective enzyme. Approximately 400 million individuals have been affected by G6PD deficiency. Since the gene is located on the X- chromosome, therefore, the condition usually affects males more than females. Since males received have the mutated gene on the X-chromosome from the carrier mothers, they tend to show the symptoms of G6PD deficiency. Since females have two X chromosomes, they are typically carriers. However, when the healthy G6PD gene-carrying chromosome is inactivated females may exhibit mild symptoms.

[ 75 ] Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is an X-linked recessive disorder that is caused by mutations in the WAS gene that encodes for the WASp protein. It is characterized by weakened immune function , eczema , and problems with blood clotting. This protein is responsible for cell movement and cell-to-cell adhesions . It relays the signals from the surface of all blood cells to the actin cytoskeleton of the cells to trigger movement and adhesion. When there is the loss of WASp due to the mutation it causes the actin cytoskeleton to not properly form, or not form at all.  In white blood cells , this becomes a problem as the lack of actin cytoskeleton does not allow it to respond to the environment and foreign invaders. Therefore, having impaired immune responses causes increased vulnerability to infections and autoimmune diseases. Moreover, a lack of WASp proteins can impair cell growth and induce early cell death. The WAS gene is located on the X-chromosome, hence primarily affecting the males who inherit the mutated X-chromosome. Females tend to be the carriers and typically do not show symptoms until the healthy X-chromosome is inactivated.

[ 76 ] v t e X-linked disorders X-linked recessive Immune Chronic granulomatous disease (CYBB) Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency X-linked agammaglobulinemia Hyper-IgM syndrome type 1 IPEX X-linked lymphoproliferative disease Properdin deficiency Hematologic Haemophilia A Haemophilia B X-linked sideroblastic anemia Endocrine Androgen insensitivity syndrome / Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy KAL1 Kallmann syndrome X-linked adrenal hypoplasia congenita Metabolic Amino acid : Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency Oculocerebrorenal syndrome Dyslipidemia : Adrenoleukodystrophy Carbohydrate metabolism : Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency Danon disease/glycogen storage disease Type IIb Lipid storage disorder : Fabry disease Mucopolysaccharidosis : Hunter syndrome Purine–pyrimidine metabolism : Lesch–Nyhan syndrome Mineral : Menkes disease / Occipital horn syndrome Nervous system X-linked intellectual disability : Coffin–Lowry syndrome MASA syndrome Alpha-thalassemia mental retardation syndrome PHF8 Eye disorders: Color blindness (red and green, but not blue) Ocular albinism ( 1 ) Norrie disease Choroideremia Other: Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease (CMTX2-3) Pelizaeus–Merzbacher disease SMAX2 Skin and related tissue Dyskeratosis congenita Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (EDA) X-linked ichthyosis X-linked endothelial corneal dystrophy Neuromuscular Becker muscular dystrophy / Duchenne Centronuclear myopathy (MTM1) Conradi–Hünermann syndrome Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy 1 Urologic Alport syndrome Dent's disease X-linked nephrogenic diabetes insipidus Bone / tooth AMELX Amelogenesis imperfecta No primary system Barth syndrome McLeod syndrome Smith–Fineman–Myers syndrome Simpson–Golabi–Behmel syndrome Mohr–Tranebjærg syndrome Nasodigitoacoustic syndrome X-linked dominant X-linked hypophosphatemia Focal dermal hypoplasia Fragile X syndrome Aicardi syndrome Incontinentia pigmenti Rett syndrome CHILD syndrome Lujan–Fryns syndrome Orofaciodigital syndrome 1 Craniofrontonasal dysplasia Screening for genetic diseases [ edit ] Genetic screening , which includes carrier screening , prenatal screening and newborn screening may be performed to enable early detection of genetic defects.

Carrier screening [ edit ] Carrier screening is conducted on prospective parent(s) to determine if they are carriers (heterozygous) for an X-linked recessive or autosomal recessive disease.  Individuals who undergo carrier screening commonly have a family history of genetic disease or belong to an at-risk population and wish to determine the likelihood of having a child with a genetic disorder.  Carrier screening is performed by taking a blood sample, saliva sample or buccal swab and using laboratory techniques such as next-generation sequencing or Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) to determine if the parent carries the allele implicated in the genetic disease.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] Prenatal screening [ edit ] Prenatal screening is can be conducted on pregnant females to test for a number of genetic conditions.  It is more commonly used to test for aneuploidy (for example, Down syndrome or trisomy 21), but can also be used to detect X-linked recessive or X-linked dominant disorders (for example, fragile X-syndrome ).  Prenatal screening involves maternal blood tests and ultrasound to defect such defects in the developing fetus .  This can confirm the diagnosis of a genetic condition, allowing parents to prepare or consider terminating the pregnancy .

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] Newborn screening [ edit ] Newborn screening is conducted on infants less than a week old to test for a variety of genetic disorders, specifically those with high morbidity and mortality rates to enable early intervention.  Newborn screening is conducted by analyzing the biochemistry of a spot of dried blood (often obtained via a heel prick test ).  This form of screening is also used to detect endocrine and metabolic disorders.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] Y-linked inheritance [ edit ] The Y chromosome [ edit ] This image depicts a karyotype . The Y chromosome is at the bottom right in a red box. Note how it is notably smaller than the X chromosome, the chromosome to its left.

The Y chromosome is comprised of approximately 59 million base pairs and 200 genes, entailing approximately 66 protein-coding genes.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] [ 88 ] Since only biological males possess the Y chromosome, it is essential in male sexual differentiation , which results in the production of male sex hormones that lead to the development of male sex organs, reproduction, fertility, and spermatogenesis , commonly known as sperm production.

[ 87 ] [ 89 ] [ 90 ] Additionally, due to the small length of the Y chromosome in comparison to the X chromosome, recombination is mostly suppressed, and thus it remains relatively distinct from the X chromosome, maintaining important genes for male fertility and sexual differentiation.

[ 86 ] Particularly, the SRY gene on the Y chromosome is known to be involved in sex determination .

[ 86 ] As well, AZF, azoospermia factor region encodes for 16 proteins, and are thus  related to the production of sperm.

[ 91 ] The Y chromosome has a highly repetitive sequence, and thus had many gaps that were not able to be sequenced until recently.

[ 86 ] Based on advances in the Makova Lab at Penn State and Phillippy at the Human Genome Research Institute, they successfully filled in the missing sequence gaps.

[ 86 ] The SRY gene [ edit ] The SRY gene , being the sex-determining region of the Y chromosome, gives the genetic information required for the body to code for proteins that are involved in male sexual differentiation.

[ 92 ] The expression of the SRY gene is regulated via a myriad of transcription factors , which is a protein that can bind to genes of interest and increase or decrease their expression.

[ 92 ] Specific to SRY these include, Six1, WT1, and Gata4.

[ 86 ] SRY expression is regulated spatially and temporally in a strict manner.

[ 86 ] The SRY gene encodes a transcription factor called the Testes Determining Factor (Tdf), and Tdf binds to and activates another gene called Sox9 .

[ 86 ] Sox9 then codes a transcription factor that leads to the development of the testes via many downstream pathways that ultimately result in the targeting of Sertoli cell which is where sperm is produced and the Lydig cell, also called testicular somatic cells, which is where the androgen hormone is produced, that is essential for male sexual differentiation.

[ 86 ] [ 93 ] Therefore, SRY expression leads to testis development in biological XY males, and absence of SRY in biological XX females, leads to ovary development.

[ 94 ] Swyer syndrome , also known as complete gonadal dysgenesis or pure gonadal dysgenesis, is a condition that impairs the process of sexual differentiation in males.

[ 92 ] Male individuals with this condition have a normal XY genotype , yet due to the impairment of the SRY gene, the protein critical in male sexual determination is non-functional or is not produced at all.

[ 92 ] As a result, male sexual differentiation is prevented, and an affected individual will lack male sexual characteristics such as gonads, and will instead develop biological female-typical sex characteristics, such as a uterus, fallopian tubes, etc.

[ 92 ] Y-linked inheritance [ edit ] Y-linked inheritance, also known as Holandric inheritance, refers to genes that are inherited via the Y chromosome.

[ 95 ] In other words, Y-linked inheritance involves genes that are only carried on the Y chromosome, also known as Y-linked genes .

This is a pedigree representing the offspring of individuals. Squares represent males, and circles represent females. More specifically, this pedigree depicts Y-linked or Holandric inheritance. This shows how Y-linked disorders will be passed to all son offspring, and will not be passed down at all to daughters, due to their absence of chromosome.

Inheritance of Y-linked genes can occur in two ways: complete inheritance and incomplete inheritance.

[ 96 ] Complete Y-linkage results when a gene is only found on a certain area on the Y chromosome either because there is no allele i.e. a copy of that gene, on the X chromosome or because it does not exchange with the X chromosome's allele.

[ 96 ] Complete Y linkage of heterogamous organisms can result in the following possible outcomes: Traits that only occur in males [ 96 ] [ 95 ] Y-linked disorders of males will be passed on to all sons [ 96 ] [ 95 ] The daughters of affected men being phenotypically normal, i.e. 'normal' presenting, and not having affected offspring [ 96 ] [ 95 ] Conversely, incomplete Y linkage is when traits on a gene cross-over and exchange information between the X and Y chromosome.

[ 96 ] Y-linked disorders [ edit ] Overview [ edit ] The first few Y-linked inheritance cases were recognized in the early 20th century, with initial theories proposing certain traits were passed exclusively from father to son.

[ 97 ] However, it was not until genetic advancements and cytogenetic techniques that enabled researchers to have a better understanding of the Y chromosome in greater detail.

[ 98 ] When scientist began mapping the Y chromosome and identifying traits that followed a paternal lineage, it became evident that certain genetic conditions were linked to the male-specific chromosome. The identification of Y-linked inheritance marked a significant milestone in laying the groundwork for expanding research into male-specific conditions. Further understanding led to exploration of developmental disorders, allowing of diagnostic and therapeutic strategies to be explored in medical genetics. Eventually, ongoing investigations into Y chromosome revealed the broader picture in human biology, evolution and disease susceptibility.

[ 99 ] Hypertrichosis [ edit ] Hypertrichosis is a genetic condition that results in the excessive growth of hair on a specific area of the body, that is abnormal for the age, sex or race of an individual.

[ 100 ] Specifically, hypertrichosis centralized to the outer ear, also known as the auricle, is a Y-linked disordered, commonly referred to as hypertrichosis pinnae auris.

[ 100 ] Since hypertrichosis pinnae auris is a Y-linked disorder, this means only biological males and subsequent male offspring can be affected by this disorder.

[ 100 ] Tommasi C. was crucial in determining the Y-linked origin of this disorder, by creating a pedigree that elicited holandric inheritance.

[ 100 ] Conversely, hypertrichosis cannot be confused with Hirustism , which is characterized by excessive androgen sensitive hair growth, and thus is most often diagnosed in women and children that tend to have male-typical hair patterns.

Considered to be relatively rare as the congenital form is classified in 2 categories; generalized hypertrichosis (CGH) and localized hypertrichosis (CLH).

[ 101 ] The image depicts Hypertrichosis, specifically overgrowth of chest hair in varying places CGH is seen amongst individuals with excessive hair growth that cover most of the body while CLH affects a specific area of the body, typically a patch of area. Although the incidence is unknown, it seen that CGH is extremely rare with very few cases documented worldwide compared to CLH is more commonly seen.

[ 101 ] Now Acquired hypertrichosis is a type that can develop later in life, typically from medicinal triggers or from underlying medical conditions.

[ 101 ] Webbed toes [ edit ] Webbing of the toes is the result of premature arrested development in the fetal stage.

[ 102 ] The premature arrest of development results in second and third digit fusion of the skin.

[ 102 ] The Y-linked trait of webbed toes causes a skin connection between the second and third digit.

[ 88 ] Research studies based in a pedigree analysis have shown that webbed toes follow holandric inheritance in biological males.

[ 102 ] [ 100 ] This image depicts webbed toes, whereby there is a connection of the second and third digits.

Considered to be the most prevalent congential limb malformation where the occurrence is 1 in 2000-3000 in live births, accounting for 20% of congenial hand malformation.

[ 103 ] The condition is more frequently seen in males where it is a 2:1 ratio for male-to-females. Syndactyl can present as an “isolated anomaly” where it occurs as a standalone condition often with no known cause.

[ 104 ] In other scenarios, syndactyl is a features amongst other symptoms of a larger genetic disorder (ie. Holt-Oram syndrome).

Infertility in biological males [ edit ] Overview [ edit ] Y-linked genes responsible for spermatogenesis can result in male infertility, characterized by azoospermia , [ 105 ] [ 106 ] or hypo-fertility, which is the hindered production of sperm.

[ 95 ] Azoospermia is the absence of functional sperm in male ejaculate due to issues in sperm motility or lack of sperm production.

[ 106 ] As a result, Y-chromosome linked infertility is characterized as the inability to fertilize an egg and produce children.

[ 105 ] Sperm infertility results from the failure of the sperm to mature or a disfigured sperm that is not able to travel and fertilize an egg effectively.

[ 105 ] Prevalence of Y chromosome Infertility [ edit ] Male infertility affects 1 in 20 men, at 0.05% and primary spermatogenic failure accounts for a large portion of these cases.

[ 91 ] More specifically, Y chromosome infertility is relatively rare at a 0.03-0.05% frequency.

[ 105 ] Etiology of Y chromosome Infertility [ edit ] Mutations to the male-specific region of the Y chromosome (MSY) are typically the cause of spermatogenic failure, which is the reduced or absent sperm production in semen.

[ 107 ] More specifically, deletions in long arm of the Y chromosome are associated with spermatogenic failure, as well some paternal lineages of the Y chromosome are associated with reduced sperm counts.

[ 108 ] Y chromosome deletions are determined as the most frequent cause of genetic azoopermia, however other instances such as rearrangements, deletions and duplications may contribute to infertile biological males.

[ 108 ] Sex chromosome aneuploidy [ edit ] Thus far, this article has discussed the patterns of inheritance of sex-linked genes / traits in diploid organisms with the canonical XX (female) or XY (male) genotype.  However, there exists a very small fraction of the human population with aneuploidy (an abnormal number) of the sex chromosomes.

[ 109 ] This includes monosomy of the X-chromosome (XO genotype), also called Turner syndrome, in which up to 0.04% of females are born with one X-chromosome as supposed to two. Turner syndrome can result in developmental and health-related issues, including short stature, problems with ovarian development, and congenital heart defects.

[ 110 ] Females can also present with trisomy of the X-chromosome, or the XXX genotype, which can result in tall stature, and in some cases, delayed development of speech, language, and motor functions.

[ 111 ] Sex chromosome aneuploidy which results in male development includes the XXY genotype, and very rarely, the XXYY genotype.

[ 109 ] XXY, also known as Klinefelter syndrome, can result in a variety of symptoms, the severity of which is widely variable.  Symptoms may include tall stature and reduced testosterone production, leading to delayed or incomplete development of male sex characteristics.  Those with Klinefelter syndrome will also be at greater risk for developing of learning disorders, Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), and metabolic syndromes.

[ 112 ] Males with the XXYY genotype exhibit similar but often more severe symptoms to Klinefelter syndrome, and are infertile.

[ 113 ] It is notable that, while sex chromosome aneuploidy is not an inherited condition (and instead arises due to nondisjunction of the sex chromosomes during meiosis) in individuals with an abnormal number of sex chromosomes, the patterns of inheritance and expression of sex-linked genes and traits will vary from those discussed for XX and XY individuals.  This is largely due to the dosage imbalance of one or both of the sex-chromosomes.  For instance, a XO female with Turner syndrome would be affected by X-linked recessive traits in the same way as XY males, lacking a second X-chromosome encoding a dominant allele to mask the recessive phenotype.  Moreover, inactivation of all but one X-chromosomes by Xist, and the fact that nondisjunction during meiosis can lead to aneuploidy in either all or some of the body's cells, can lead to genetic mosaicism and intermediate phenotypes.

[ 109 ] Sex-linkage in animals [ edit ] Most mammals, including humans, use the XY sex determination system and thus follow the same patterns of sex-linked inheritance discussed herein so long as the sex chromosomes are present in normal ploidy (diploidy).

[ 114 ] However, patterns of inheritance of sex-linked traits differ in animals that use sex-determination systems other than XY .  For instance, in the ZW sex-determination system used by birds, the mammalian pattern is reversed, since the male is the homogametic (ZZ) and the female is heterogametic (ZW).

[ 115 ] Drosophila melanogaster , a common model organism in genetics and developmental biology, carry both the X and Y sex chromosomes.  However, the rules of sex determination are not the same as in humans and other placental mammals in which sex is determined by the presence or absence of the Y-chromosome.  Instead, sex is determined by the ratio of X-chromosomes to autosomes, the X:A ratio.  A ratio of 1:2 results in male development, while a ratio of 1:1 results in female development.  Drosophila have two autosomes, thus XO and XY flies are males (1X:2A), while XX flies are females (2X:2A).  As the X-chromosome makes up a far more significant portion of the genome, far more genes are sex-linked in Drosophila as compared to humans.

[ 116 ] Moreover, the mechanism of dosage compensation in Drosophila is not X-inactivation in females, but the two-fold upregulation of expression of genes encoded on the X-chromosome in males.

[ 117 ] Much of the scientific knowledge on sex-linked traits was derived from observations and experimental evidence made in non-human animals.  Some of the discoveries instrumental to forming this body of knowledge include: The first sex-linked gene ever discovered was the "lacticolor" X-linked recessive gene in the moth Abraxas grossulariata by Leonard Doncaster .

[ 118 ] White eyes in Drosophila melanogaster flies was one of the earliest sex-linked genes discovered.

[ 119 ] Fur color in domestic cats : Calico or tortoiseshell cats are nearly always female because these cats receive one allele for black (or gray) fur colour on one inherited X-chromosome, and one allele for orange fur colour on the other X-chromosome.  White fur colour is located on an autosome.  Thus, only females and XXY males can have this fur coloration.

[ 120 ] History [ edit ] Experimental cross performed by Thomas Hunt Morgan , illustrating the X-linked inheritance of white-eyed mutation in fruit flies [ 121 ] Discovery of sex chromosomes [ edit ] The relationship between sex chromosomes and Mendelian inheritance was first discovered by Nettie Stevens.

[ 86 ] Steven's was influenced by McClung's work highlighting, that some insect species, the difference in chromosome counts possibly determined whether cells develop into males or females.

[ 122 ] In Steven's study called Studies in spermatogenesis, she found that biological females carry two X chromosomes, whereas males carry one X and a smaller Y chromosome.

[ 86 ] By identifying the male unique role of the Y chromosome, Stevens was able to confirm a chromosomal role in sex determination .

[ 86 ] She had done this by using a microscope Tenebrio molitor, mealworm beetles, to observe that there were 20 chromosome in both the male and females. However, in the males, she had found that the 20th chromosome was significantly smaller than the other 19 chromosomes. Steven's continued Studies in spermatogenesis, and found the same pattern in 18 other species. Additionally, her work contradicted the common theories that attributed to sex determination, including role of environmental factors.

[ 122 ] Discovery of X-linked inheritance [ edit ] Red-green colour blindness was the first described on paper, in 1794 by John Dalton , who was affected by the disorder himself.

[ 123 ] However, its recognition of its X-linked inheritance characteristic was only established later. The X-chromosome was discovered in 1890 by Hermann Henking , [ 124 ] which he discovered while studying spermatocyte divisions of the firebug. He found that one chromosome behaved different from all the others, and did not divide during meiosis . Instead, he found that it went into one of the two germ cells. This cell that did not divide became known as the X-chromosome.

[ 125 ] Then in 1910, Thomas Hunt Morgan discovered an X-linked mutation on a Drosophila , [ 126 ] who then conducted experiments and observations to understand the X-linked inheritance. He observed a white-eye male fruit fly, which is rare, and through cross-breeding experiments, he found that the mutation was inherited differently in males and females. He found that males, who had the only one X-chromosomes displayed the condition, if the mutated gene was present.

[ 127 ] Discovery of X-inactivation [ edit ] In 1961, Mary Lyon proposed that one of the two X chromosomes in female mammalian cells would experience random inactivation (see X-chromosome inactivation ) in the early embryonic stage .

[ 128 ] According to her hypothesis, both males and females should have one single X chromosome that is active. This enhanced the understanding of the fundamental mechanisms of X-linked inheritance.

Related terms [ edit ] It is important to distinguish between sex-linked characters, which are controlled by genes on sex chromosomes, and two other categories.

[ 129 ] Sex-influenced traits [ edit ] Sex-influenced or sex-conditioned traits are phenotypes affected by whether they appear in a male or female body.

[ 130 ] Even in a homozygous dominant or recessive female the condition may not be expressed fully. Example: baldness in humans.

Sex-limited traits [ edit ] These are characters only expressed in one sex. They may be caused by genes on either autosomal or sex chromosomes.

[ 130 ] Examples: female sterility in Drosophila ; and many polymorphic characters in insects, especially in relation to mimicry . Closely linked genes on autosomes called " supergenes " are often responsible for the latter.

[ 131 ] [ 132 ] [ 133 ] See also [ edit ] X-linked dominant inheritance X-linked recessive inheritance Genetic epidemiology List of genetic disorders References [ edit ] ^ a b Kumar, Rahul; Gautam, Akash; Singh, Shashi Bala (2020), "Sex-Linked" , in Vonk, Jennifer; Shackelford, Todd (eds.), Encyclopedia of Animal Cognition and Behavior , Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

1– 4, doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-47829-6_562-1 , ISBN 978-3-319-47829-6 , retrieved 10 March 2025 ^ Gilbert, Scott F. (2000).

"Environmental Sex Determination" .

Developmental Biology (6th ed.). Sinauer Associates.

^ Gilbert, Scott F. (2000).

"Chromosomal Sex Determination in Mammals" .

Developmental Biology (6th ed.). Sinauer Associates.

^ Information (US), National Center for Biotechnology (1998).

"Chromosome Map" .

Genes and Disease [Internet] . National Center for Biotechnology Information (US).

^ Basta, Marina; Pandya, Ashish M. (2025).

"Genetics, X-Linked Inheritance" .

StatPearls . StatPearls Publishing.

PMID 32491315 .

^ "Y Chromosome" .

www.genome.gov . Retrieved 14 February 2025 .

^ Gai, J; He, J (2013).

Brenner's Encyclopedia of Genetics (2nd ed.). Academic Press. pp.

66– 67.

ISBN 9780080961569 .

^ Basta, Marina; Pandya, Ashish M. (2025), "Genetics, X-Linked Inheritance" , StatPearls , Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing, PMID 32491315 , retrieved 21 March 2025 ^ Dobyns, William B.; Filauro, Allison; Tomson, Brett N.; Chan, April S.; Ho, Allen W.; Ting, Nicholas T.; Oosterwijk, Jan C.; Ober, Carole (30 August 2004). "Inheritance of most X-linked traits is not dominant or recessive, just X-linked".

American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A .

129A (2): 136– 143.

doi : 10.1002/ajmg.a.30123 .

PMID 15316978 .

^ Genetics home reference (2006), genetic conditions illustrations [ dead link ] , National Library of Medicine .

^ "NCI Dictionary of Genetics Terms" .

National Cancer Institute . 21 March 2025.

^ Waxman, Stephen G. (2010).

Molecular Neurology . Burlington: Elsevier Science.

ISBN 978-0-12-369509-3 .

^ "Sex(X)-linked Dominant Inheritance – Michigan Genetics Resource Center" . Retrieved 21 March 2025 .

^ "Sex-linked dominant: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia" .

medlineplus.gov . Retrieved 21 March 2025 .

^ a b "What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?: MedlinePlus Genetics" .

medlineplus.gov . Retrieved 10 March 2025 .

^ "Inheritance Patterns" .

Understanding Genetics: A New York, Mid-Atlantic Guide for Patients and Health Professionals . Genetic Alliance. 8 July 2009.

^ a b Basta, Marina; Pandya, Ashish M. (2025), "Genetics, X-Linked Inheritance" , StatPearls , Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing, PMID 32491315 , retrieved 10 March 2025 ^ Shvetsova, Ekaterina; Sofronova, Alina; Monajemi, Ramin; Gagalova, Kristina; Draisma, Harmen H. M.; White, Stefan J.; Santen, Gijs W. E.; Chuva de Sousa Lopes, Susana M.; Heijmans, Bastiaan T.; van Meurs, Joyce; Jansen, Rick; Franke, Lude; Kiełbasa, Szymon M.; den Dunnen, Johan T.; ‘t Hoen, Peter A. C. (14 December 2018).

"Skewed X-inactivation is common in the general female population" .

European Journal of Human Genetics .

27 (3): 455– 465.

doi : 10.1038/s41431-018-0291-3 .

PMC 6460563 .

PMID 30552425 .

^ "Sex-linked recessive: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia" .

medlineplus.gov . Retrieved 10 March 2025 .

^ Jais, Jean Philippe; Knebelmann, Bertrand; Giatras, Iannis; De Marchi, Mario; Rizzoni, Gianfranco; Renieri, Alessandra; Weber, Manfred; Gross, Oliver; Netzer, Kai-Olaf; Flinter, Frances; Pirson, Yves; Dahan, Karin; Wieslander, Jörgen; Persson, Ulf; Tryggvason, Karl; Martin, Paula; Hertz, Jens Michael; Schröder, Cornelis; Sanak, Marek; Carvalho, Maria Fernanda; Saus, Juan; Antignac, Corinne; Smeets, Hubert; Gubler, Marie Claire (October 2003). "X-Linked Alport Syndrome: Natural History and Genotype-Phenotype Correlations in Girls and Women Belonging to 195 Families: A 'European Community Alport Syndrome Concerted Action' Study".

Journal of the American Society of Nephrology .

14 (10): 2603– 2610.

doi : 10.1097/01.ASN.0000090034.71205.74 .

hdl : 2078.1/40773 .

PMID 14514738 .

^ Gartler, Stanley M.; et al. (2009). "Incontinentia Pigmenti".

Encyclopedia of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease . pp.

1045– 1046.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-540-29676-8_942 .

ISBN 978-3-540-67136-7 .

^ Incontinentia Pigmenti at eMedicine ^ Seager, M. J.; Whatley, S. D.; Anstey, A. V.; Millard, T. P. (2014). "X-linked dominant protoporphyria: a new porphyria".

Clinical and Experimental Dermatology .

39 (1): 35– 37.

doi : 10.1111/ced.12202 .

PMID 24131146 .

^ a b "Alport Syndrome" .

www.kidney.org . Retrieved 28 March 2025 .

^ Nozu, Kandai; Nakanishi, Koichi; Abe, Yoshifusa; Udagawa, Tomohiro; Okada, Shinichi; Okamoto, Takayuki; Kaito, Hiroshi; Kanemoto, Katsuyoshi; Kobayashi, Anna; Tanaka, Eriko; Tanaka, Kazuki; Hama, Taketsugu; Fujimaru, Rika; Miwa, Saori; Yamamura, Tomohiko (February 2019).

"A review of clinical characteristics and genetic backgrounds in Alport syndrome" .

Clinical and Experimental Nephrology .

23 (2): 158– 168.

doi : 10.1007/s10157-018-1629-4 .

ISSN 1437-7799 .

PMC 6510800 .

PMID 30128941 .

^ Zaunbrecher, Nicole.

"Types of Alport Syndrome - Alport Syndrome News" .

alportsyndromenews.com . Retrieved 28 March 2025 .

^ "Alport syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics" .

medlineplus.gov . Retrieved 28 March 2025 .

^ Nozu, Kandai; Yamamura, Tomohiko; Horinouchi, Tomoko (1993), Adam, Margaret P.; Feldman, Jerry; Mirzaa, Ghayda M.; Pagon, Roberta A. (eds.), "Alport Syndrome" , GeneReviews® , Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle, PMID 20301386 , retrieved 28 March 2025 ^ "Alport Syndrome Treatment & Management: Approach Considerations, Monitoring, Kidney Transplantation" . 2 August 2024.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ "EdRen - Edinburgh Royal Infirmary Renal Unit - Alport anti-GBM disease" . 10 February 2016. Archived from the original on 10 February 2016 . Retrieved 28 March 2025 .

^ "Fragile X syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics" .

medlineplus.gov . Retrieved 29 March 2025 .

^ a b c McLennan, Yingratana; Polussa, Jonathan; Tassone, Flora; Hagerman, Randi (May 2011).

"Fragile x syndrome" .

Current Genomics .

12 (3): 216– 224.

doi : 10.2174/138920211795677886 .

ISSN 1875-5488 .

PMC 3137006 .

PMID 22043169 .

^ "Genes and human disease" . 20 October 2012. Archived from the original on 20 October 2012 . Retrieved 29 March 2025 .

^ Bartholomay, Kristi L.; Lee, Cindy H.; Bruno, Jennifer L.; Lightbody, Amy A.; Reiss, Allan L. (12 January 2019).

"Closing the Gender Gap in Fragile X Syndrome: Review on Females with FXS and Preliminary Research Findings" .

Brain Sciences .

9 (1): 11.

doi : 10.3390/brainsci9010011 .

ISSN 2076-3425 .

PMC 6356553 .

PMID 30642066 .

^ Garber, Kathryn B.; Visootsak, Jeannie; Warren, Stephen T. (June 2008).

"Fragile X syndrome" .

European Journal of Human Genetics .

16 (6): 666– 672.

doi : 10.1038/ejhg.2008.61 .

ISSN 1018-4813 .

PMC 4369150 .

PMID 18398441 .

^ Hogan, Andrew J. (1 June 2012).

"Visualizing carrier status: Fragile X syndrome and genetic diagnosis since the 1940s" .

Endeavour .

36 (2): 77– 84.

doi : 10.1016/j.endeavour.2011.12.002 .

PMID 22257912 .

^ a b c "Rett syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics" .

medlineplus.gov . Retrieved 29 March 2025 .

^ Trappe, R.; Laccone, F.; Cobilanschi, J.; Meins, M.; Huppke, P.; Hanefeld, F.; Engel, W. (May 2001).

"MECP2 mutations in sporadic cases of Rett syndrome are almost exclusively of paternal origin" .

American Journal of Human Genetics .

68 (5): 1093– 1101.

doi : 10.1086/320109 .

ISSN 0002-9297 .

PMC 1226090 .

PMID 11309679 .

^ a b c d e "Rett Syndrome Fact Sheet" . 14 October 2017. Archived from the original on 14 October 2017 . Retrieved 29 March 2025 .

^ Schwartzman, J. S.; Bernardino, Andrea; Nishimura, Agnes; Gomes, Raquel R.; Zatz, Mayana (June 2001).

"Rett Syndrome in a Boy with a 47,XXY Karyotype Confirmed by a Rare Mutation in the MECP2 Gene" .

Neuropediatrics .

32 (3): 162– 164.

doi : 10.1055/s-2001-16620 .

ISSN 0174-304X .

PMID 11521215 .

^ "A rare genetic neurological and developmental disorder-Rett syndrome - Diagnosis & treatment" .

Mayo Clinic . Retrieved 30 March 2025 .

^ "Diagnosing & Testing Rett Syndrome" .

International Rett Syndrome Foundation . Retrieved 30 March 2025 .

^ Research, Center for Drug Evaluation and (20 March 2023).

"FDA approves first treatment for Rett Syndrome" .

FDA . Archived from the original on 13 March 2023.

^ Saito, Tasuku; Nishii, Yutaka; Yasuda, Toshiyuki; Ito, Nobuaki; Suzuki, Hisanori; Igarashi, Takashi; Fukumoto, Seiji; Fujita, Toshiro (1 October 2009).

"Familial hypophosphatemic rickets caused by a large deletion in PHEX gene" .

European Journal of Endocrinology .

161 (4): 647– 651.

doi : 10.1530/EJE-09-0261 .

ISSN 0804-4643 .

PMID 19581284 .

^ Carpenter, Thomas O. (2000), Feingold, Kenneth R.; Ahmed, S. Faisal; Anawalt, Bradley; Blackman, Marc R. (eds.), "Primary Disorders of Phosphate Metabolism" , Endotext , South Dartmouth (MA): MDText.com, Inc., PMID 25905395 , retrieved 30 March 2025 ^ Barros, Nilana MT; Hoac, Betty; Neves, Raquel L; Addison, William N; Assis, Diego M; Murshed, Monzur; Carmona, Adriana K; McKee, Marc D (1 March 2013).

"Proteolytic processing of osteopontin by PHEX and accumulation of osteopontin fragments in Hyp mouse bone, the murine model of X-linked hypophosphatemia" .

Journal of Bone and Mineral Research .

28 (3): 688– 699.

doi : 10.1002/jbmr.1766 .

ISSN 0884-0431 .

PMID 22991293 .

^ Boukpessi, Tchilalo; Hoac, Betty; Coyac, Benjamin R.; Leger, Thibaut; Garcia, Camille; Wicart, Philippe; Whyte, Michael P.; Glorieux, Francis H.; Linglart, Agnès; Chaussain, Catherine; McKee, Marc D. (1 February 2017).

"Osteopontin and the dento-osseous pathobiology of X-linked hypophosphatemia" .

Bone .

95 : 151– 161.

doi : 10.1016/j.bone.2016.11.019 .

ISSN 8756-3282 .

PMID 27884786 .

^ McKee, Marc D.; Buss, Daniel J.; Reznikov, Natalie (1 March 2022).

"Mineral tessellation in bone and the stenciling principle for extracellular matrix mineralization" .

Journal of Structural Biology .

214 (1): 107823.

doi : 10.1016/j.jsb.2021.107823 .

ISSN 1047-8477 .

PMID 34915130 .

^ Carpenter, Thomas O. (1 April 1997).

"New Perspectives on the Biology and Treatment of X-Linked Hypophosphatemic Rickets" .

Pediatric Clinics of North America .

44 (2): 443– 466.

doi : 10.1016/S0031-3955(05)70485-5 .

ISSN 0031-3955 .

PMID 9130929 .

^ a b "Osteomalacia and Rickets" .

www.lecturio.com . Retrieved 30 March 2025 .

^ "Fatigue: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia" .

medlineplus.gov . Retrieved 31 March 2025 .

^ Silva, Sandra; Jeanty, Philippe (7 January 2007).

"TheFetus.net - Cloverleaf skull or kleeblattsch?del" .

thefetus.net . Archived from the original on 7 January 2007 . Retrieved 31 March 2025 .

^ "Overview of Bone Fractures" .

www.lecturio.com . Retrieved 31 March 2025 .

^ Linglart, Agnès; Biosse-Duplan, Martin; Briot, Karine; Chaussain, Catherine; Esterle, Laure; Guillaume-Czitrom, Séverine; Kamenicky, Peter; Nevoux, Jerome; Prié, Dominique; Rothenbuhler, Anya; Wicart, Philippe; Harvengt, Pol (2014).

"Therapeutic management of hypophosphatemic rickets from infancy to adulthood" .

Endocrine Connections .

3 (1): R13–30.

doi : 10.1530/EC-13-0103 .

ISSN 2049-3614 .

PMC 3959730 .

PMID 24550322 .

^ Haffner, Dieter; Emma, Francesco; Eastwood, Deborah M.; Biosse Duplan, Martin; Bacchetta, Justine; Schnabel, Dirk; Wicart, Philippe; Bockenhauer, Detlef; Santos, Fernando; Levtchenko, Elena; Harvengt, Pol; Kirchhoff, Martha; Di Rocco, Federico; Chaussain, Catherine; Brandi, Maria Louisa (July 2019).

"Clinical practice recommendations for the diagnosis and management of X-linked hypophosphataemia" .

Nature Reviews. Nephrology .

15 (7): 435– 455.

doi : 10.1038/s41581-019-0152-5 .

ISSN 1759-507X .

PMC 7136170 .

PMID 31068690 .

^ Imel, Erik A.; DiMeglio, Linda A.; Hui, Siu L.; Carpenter, Thomas O.; Econs, Michael J. (April 2010).

"Treatment of X-linked hypophosphatemia with calcitriol and phosphate increases circulating fibroblast growth factor 23 concentrations" .

The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism .

95 (4): 1846– 1850.

doi : 10.1210/jc.2009-1671 .

ISSN 1945-7197 .

PMC 2853995 .

PMID 20157195 .

^ Ewert, Annika; Rehberg, Mirko; Schlingmann, Karl Peter; Hiort, Olaf; John-Kroegel, Ulrike; Metzing, Oliver; Wühl, Elke; Schaefer, Franz; Kemper, Markus J; Derichs, Ute; Richter-Unruh, Annette; Patzer, Ludwig; Albers, Norbert; Dunstheimer, Desiree; Haberland, Holger (1 October 2023).

"Effects of Burosumab Treatment on Mineral Metabolism in Children and Adolescents With X-linked Hypophosphatemia" .

The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism .

108 (10): e998 – e1006 .

doi : 10.1210/clinem/dgad223 .

ISSN 0021-972X .

PMID 37097907 .

^ a b Venugopal, Vijay; Pavlakis, Steven (2025).

"Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy" .

StatPearls . StatPearls Publishing.

PMID 29493971 .

^ a b "Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD)" .

Cleveland Clinic . 25 July 2022 . Retrieved 22 March 2025 .

^ Yiu, Eppie M; Kornberg, Andrew J (August 2015). "Duchenne muscular dystrophy".

Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health .

51 (8): 759– 764.

doi : 10.1111/jpc.12868 .

PMID 25752877 .

^ Aartsma-Rus, Annemieke; Ginjaar, Ieke B; Bushby, Kate (March 2016).

"The importance of genetic diagnosis for Duchenne muscular dystrophy" .

Journal of Medical Genetics .

53 (3): 145– 151.

doi : 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103387 .

PMC 4789806 .

PMID 26754139 .

^ Gao, Q. Q.; McNally, E. M. (17 January 2011). Terjung, Ronald (ed.).

Comprehensive Physiology . Vol. 5 (1 ed.). Wiley. pp.

1223– 1239.

doi : 10.1002/cphy.c140048 .

ISBN 978-0-470-65071-4 .

PMC 4767260 .

PMID 26140716 .

^ Smith, CI Edvard; Berglöf, Anna (1993).

"X-Linked Agammaglobulinemia" .

GeneReviews® . University of Washington, Seattle.

PMID 20301626 .

^ a b Maas, A.; Hendriks, R. W. (2001).

"Role of Bruton's tyrosine kinase in B cell development" .

Developmental Immunology .

8 ( 3– 4): 171– 181.

doi : 10.1155/2001/28962 .

PMC 2276078 .

PMID 11785667 .

^ McDonald, C.; Xanthopoulos, C.; Kostareli, E. (2021).

"The role of Bruton's tyrosine kinase in the immune system and disease" .

Immunology .

164 (4): 722– 736.

doi : 10.1111/imm.13416 .

ISSN 0019-2805 .

PMC 8561098 .

PMID 34534359 .

^ Lackey, Alexandra E.; Ahmad, Faran (2025), "X-Linked Agammaglobulinemia" , StatPearls , Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing, PMID 31751055 , retrieved 25 March 2025 ^ Carroll, Joseph; Conway, Bevil R. (1 January 2021), Barton, Jason J. S.; Leff, Alexander (eds.), "Chapter 8 - Color vision" , Handbook of Clinical Neurology , Neurology of Vision and Visual Disorders, 178 , Elsevier: 131– 153, doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-821377-3.00005-2 , ISBN 978-0-12-821377-3 , PMID 33832674 , retrieved 25 March 2025 ^ "Color vision deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics" .

medlineplus.gov . Retrieved 25 March 2025 .

^ a b Carroll, Joseph; Conway, Bevil R. (2021). "Color vision".

Neurology of Vision and Visual Disorders . Handbook of Clinical Neurology. Vol. 178. pp.

131– 153.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-821377-3.00005-2 .

ISBN 978-0-12-821377-3 .

PMID 33832674 .

^ a b Deeb, Samir S (July 2004). "Molecular genetics of colour vision deficiencies".

Clinical and Experimental Optometry .

87 ( 4– 5): 224– 229.

doi : 10.1111/j.1444-0938.2004.tb05052.x .

PMID 15312026 .

^ Neitz, J.; Neitz, M. (2011).

"The genetics of normal and defective color vision" .

Vision Research .

51 (7): 633– 651.

doi : 10.1016/j.visres.2010.12.002 .

PMC 3075382 .

PMID 21167193 .

^ a b Konkle, Barbara A.; Nakaya Fletcher, Shelley (1993). "Hemophilia A".

GeneReviews® . Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle.

PMID 20301578 .

^ "Hemophilia A Overview: Symptoms, Genetics, Treatments" .

National Bleeding Disorders Foundation . Retrieved 25 March 2025 .

^ "Hemophilia: MedlinePlus Genetics" .

medlineplus.gov . Retrieved 25 March 2025 .

^ "Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics" .

medlineplus.gov . Retrieved 25 March 2025 .

^ "Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics" .

medlineplus.gov . Retrieved 25 March 2025 .

^ Antonarakis, Stylianos E. (September 2019). "Carrier screening for recessive disorders".

Nature Reviews Genetics .

20 (9): 549– 561.

doi : 10.1038/s41576-019-0134-2 .

PMID 31142809 .

^ Genetic Alliance; New York-Mid-Atlantic Consortium for Genetic and Newborn Screening Services, eds. (2009).

Understanding genetics: a New York, Mid-Atlantic guide for patients and health professionals . Washington, DC: Genetic Alliance.

ISBN 978-0-9821622-1-7 .

^ Gregg, Anthony R.; Aarabi, Mahmoud; Klugman, Susan; Leach, Natalia T.; Bashford, Michael T.; Goldwaser, Tamar; Chen, Emily; Sparks, Teresa N.; Reddi, Honey V.; Rajkovic, Aleksandar; Dungan, Jeffrey S. (1 October 2021).

"Screening for autosomal recessive and X-linked conditions during pregnancy and preconception: a practice resource of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG)" .

Genetics in Medicine .

23 (10): 1793– 1806.

doi : 10.1038/s41436-021-01203-z .

ISSN 1098-3600 .

PMC 8488021 .

PMID 34285390 .

^ "Carrier Screening" .

www.acog.org . Retrieved 10 March 2025 .

^ Cuckle, Howard; Maymon, Ron (February 2016). "Development of prenatal screening—A historical overview".

Seminars in Perinatology .

40 (1): 12– 22.

doi : 10.1053/j.semperi.2015.11.003 .

PMID 26764253 .

^ "Prenatal testing: Is it right for me?" .

Mayo Clinic . Retrieved 10 March 2025 .

^ "What Is Fragile X Syndrome (FXS)?" .

Cleveland Clinic . Archived from the original on 13 February 2025 . Retrieved 10 March 2025 .

^ Anderson, R.; Rothwell, E.; Botkin, J. R. (2011).

"Newborn Screening" .

Annual Review of Nursing Research .

29 (1): 113– 132.

doi : 10.1891/0739-6686.29.113 .

ISSN 0739-6686 .

PMC 7768912 .

PMID 22891501 .

^ Ding, Si; Han, Lianshu (24 October 2022).

"Newborn screening for genetic disorders: Current status and prospects for the future" .

Pediatric Investigation .

6 (4): 291– 298.

doi : 10.1002/ped4.12343 .

ISSN 2574-2272 .

PMC 9789938 .

PMID 36582269 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Dever, Jennifer (2024).

"Female Biology" .

All USF Faculty Authored Books : 54– 107.

^ a b "6.5: Y-Linked Genes" .

Biology LibreTexts . 22 September 2024 . Retrieved 28 February 2025 .

^ a b Singh, Natasha Ramroop (1 February 2023).

"10.5 Y-Linked Genes" .

Introduction to Genetics .

^ Stern, Curt (1957).

"The Problem of Complete Y-Linkage in Man" .

American Journal of Human Genetics .

9 (3): 147– 166.

PMC 1931892 .

PMID 13469791 .

^ Zhao, Roseanne F.

"The Y chromosome: beyond gender determination" .

www.genome.gov . Retrieved 28 February 2025 .

^ a b Li, Zheng; Haines, Christopher J; Han, Yibing (1 April 2008).

" "Micro-deletions" of the human Y chromosome and their relationship with male infertility" .

Journal of Genetics and Genomics .

35 (4): 193– 199.

doi : 10.1016/S1673-8527(08)60027-2 .

ISSN 1673-8527 .

PMID 18439975 .

^ a b c d e "SRY gene: MedlinePlus Genetics" .

medlineplus.gov . Retrieved 5 March 2025 .

^ Hughes, Jennifer F.; Page, David C. (23 November 2015).

"The Biology and Evolution of Mammalian Y Chromosomes" .

Annual Review of Genetics .

49 : 507– 527.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-genet-112414-055311 .

hdl : 1721.1/108037 .

ISSN 0066-4197 .

PMID 26442847 .

^ Okashita, Naoki; Tachibana, Makoto (28 September 2021).

"Transcriptional Regulation of the Y-Linked Mammalian Testis-Determining Gene SRY" .

Sexual Development .

15 ( 5– 6): 351– 359.

doi : 10.1159/000519217 .

ISSN 1661-5425 .

PMID 34583357 .

^ a b c d e Rodakis, G.C. (2013). "Paternal Inheritance".

Brenner's Encyclopedia of Genetics . pp.

238– 239.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-374984-0.01125-6 .

ISBN 978-0-08-096156-9 .

Male-specific chromosomes provide the most straightforward cases of strict paternal inheritance. In the XY/XX sex chromosome system of mammals, sex is a paternally inherited factor because of the action of a single Y-linked gene. In humans, this gene is the SRY (sex-determining region Y), which encodes a transcription factor required for testis determination.

^ a b c d e f Stern, Curt (September 1957).

"The Problem of Complete Y-Linkage in Man" .

American Journal of Human Genetics .

9 (3): 147– 166.

PMC 1931892 .

PMID 13469791 .

^ Scientific American. (2023). The complete human Y chromosome marks an opportunity to move away from stigma ^ Jobling, M. A., & Tyler-Smith, C. (2017). Human Y-chromosome variation in the genome-sequencing era. Nature Reviews Genetics, 18(8), 485–497 ^ Hughes, J. F., et al. (2020). A Y chromosome assembly for the domestic goat and insight into mammalian sex chromosome evolution. Nature Communications, 11, Article 2539 ^ a b c d e "JCDR - Biological anthropology, Hairy ears, Human biology, Human genetics, Pedigree analysis, Penetrance, Population variation, Y-linkage" .

jcdr.net . Retrieved 7 March 2025 .

^ a b c "Pavone P, Praticò AD, Falsaperla R, Ruggieri M, Zollino M, Corsello G, Neri G. Congenital generalized hypertrichosis: the skin as a clue to complex malformation syndromes. Ital J Pediatr. 2015 Aug 5;41:55. doi: 10.1186/s13052-015-0161-3. PMID: 26242548; PMCID: PMC4526284".

doi : 10.1186/s13052-015-0161-3 .

PMID 26242548 .

{{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |url= ( help ) ^ a b c "Y Linked Inheritance" .

Unacademy . Retrieved 7 March 2025 .

^ "Syndactyly: Practice Essentials, Etiology, Epidemiology" . March 2024.

^ Mahindroo S, Tabaie S (March 14, 2023) Syndactyly in the Pediatric Population: A Review of the Literature. Cureus 15(3): e36118. doi:10.7759/cureus.36118 ^ a b c d "Y chromosome infertility: MedlinePlus Genetics" .

medlineplus.gov . Retrieved 7 February 2025 .

^ a b Colaco, Stacy; Modi, Deepak (17 February 2018).

"Genetics of the human Y chromosome and its association with male infertility" .

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology .

16 (1): 14.

doi : 10.1186/s12958-018-0330-5 .

ISSN 1477-7827 .

PMC 5816366 .

PMID 29454353 .

^ Hughes, Jennifer F.; Page, David C. (23 November 2015).

"The Biology and Evolution of Mammalian Y Chromosomes" .

Annual Review of Genetics .

49 (2015): 507– 527.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-genet-112414-055311 .

hdl : 1721.1/108037 .

ISSN 0066-4197 .

PMID 26442847 .

^ a b Krausz, Csilla; Forti, G.; McElreavey, Ken (2003).

"The Y chromosome and male fertility and infertility" .

International Journal of Andrology .

26 (2): 70– 75.

doi : 10.1046/j.1365-2605.2003.00402.x .

ISSN 1365-2605 .

PMID 12641824 .

^ a b c Skuse, David; Printzlau, Frida; Wolstencroft, Jeanne (1 January 2018), Geschwind, Daniel H.; Paulson, Henry L.; Klein, Christine (eds.), "Chapter 24 - Sex chromosome aneuploidies" , Handbook of Clinical Neurology , Neurogenetics, Part I, 147 , Elsevier: 355– 376, doi : 10.1016/b978-0-444-63233-3.00024-5 , ISBN 978-0-444-63233-3 , PMID 29325624 , retrieved 27 March 2025 ^ "A genetic disorder that affects females-Turner syndrome - Symptoms & causes" .

Mayo Clinic . Retrieved 27 March 2025 .

^ "Trisomy X: MedlinePlus Genetics" .

medlineplus.gov . Retrieved 27 March 2025 .

^ "Klinefelter syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics" .

medlineplus.gov . Retrieved 27 March 2025 .

^ "48,XXYY syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics" .

medlineplus.gov . Retrieved 27 March 2025 .

^ "Genetic Mechanisms of Sex Determination" .

www.nature.com . Retrieved 27 March 2025 .

^ Bachtrog, Doris; Kirkpatrick, Mark; Mank, Judith E.; McDaniel, Stuart F.; Pires, J. Chris; Rice, William; Valenzuela, Nicole (1 September 2011).

"Are all sex chromosomes created equal?" .

Trends in Genetics .

27 (9): 350– 357.

doi : 10.1016/j.tig.2011.05.005 .

ISSN 0168-9525 .

PMID 21962970 .

^ Gilbert, Scott F. (2000), "Chromosomal Sex Determination in Drosophila" , Developmental Biology. 6th edition , Sinauer Associates , retrieved 27 March 2025 ^ Conrad, Thomas; Akhtar, Asifa (18 January 2012).

"Dosage compensation in Drosophila melanogaster: epigenetic fine-tuning of chromosome-wide transcription" .

Nature Reviews Genetics .

13 (2): 123– 134.

doi : 10.1038/nrg3124 .

PMID 22251873 .

^ Doncaster L. & Raynor G.H. 1906. Breeding experiments with Lepidoptera.

Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London .

1 : 125–133 ^ Morgan T.H. 1910. Sex-limited inheritance in Drosophila.

Science 32 : 120–122 ^ "Table:Calico and Black and Orange Tortoiseshell Cats" .

Merck Veterinary Manual . Retrieved 10 March 2025 .

^ Morgan, Thomas Hunt 1919.

The physical basis of heredity . Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott Company.

^ a b "Studies in Spermatogenesis (1905), by Nettie Maria Stevens | Embryo Project Encyclopedia" .

embryo.asu.edu . Retrieved 4 April 2025 .

^ Hunt, David M.; Dulai, Kanwaijit S.; Bowmaker, James K.; Mollon, John D. (17 February 1995).

"The Chemistry of John Dalton's Color Blindness" .

Science .

267 (5200): 984– 988.

Bibcode : 1995Sci...267..984H .

doi : 10.1126/science.7863342 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 7863342 .

^ Schwartz, James (2009).

In pursuit of the gene: from Darwin to DNA (1. paperback ed.). Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-03491-4 .

^ Paliulis, Leocadia; Fabig, Gunar; Müller-Reichert, Thomas (2023).

"The X chromosome still has a lot to reveal - revisiting Hermann Henking's work on firebugs" (PDF) .

Journal of Cell Science .

136 (4). The Company of Biologists Ltd.

doi : 10.1242/jcs.260998 .

PMID 36790431 .

^ Green, M M (1 January 2010).

"2010: A Century of Drosophila Genetics Through the Prism of the white Gene" .

Genetics .

184 (1): 3– 7.

doi : 10.1534/genetics.109.110015 .

ISSN 1943-2631 .

PMC 2815926 .

PMID 20061564 .

^ " "Sex Limited Inheritance in Drosophila" (1910), by Thomas Hunt Morgan | Embryo Project Encyclopedia" .

embryo.asu.edu . Retrieved 4 April 2025 .

^ Disteche, Christine M.; Berletch, Joel B. (December 2015).

"X-chromosome inactivation and escape" .

Journal of Genetics .

94 (4): 591– 599.

doi : 10.1007/s12041-015-0574-1 .

PMC 4826282 .

PMID 26690513 .

^ Zirkle, Conway (1946). The discovery of sex-influenced, sex limited and sex-linked heredity. In Ashley Montagu M.F. (ed) Studies in the history of science and learning offered in homage to George Sarton on the occasion of his sixtieth birthday . New York: Schuman, p167–194.

^ a b King R.C; Stansfield W.D. & Mulligan P.K. 2006.

A dictionary of genetics . 7th ed, Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-530761-5 ^ Mallet J.

; Joron M. (1999). "The evolution of diversity in warning color and mimicry: polymorphisms, shifting balance, and speciation".

Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics .

30 (1): 201– 233.

Bibcode : 1999AnRES..30..201M .

doi : 10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.30.1.201 .

^ Ford E. B.

(1965) Genetic polymorphism . p17-25. MIT Press 1965.

^ Joron M, Papa R, Beltrán M, et al. (2006).

"A conserved supergene locus controls colour pattern diversity in Heliconius butterflies" .

PLOS Biol .

4 (10): e303.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040303 .

PMC 1570757 .

PMID 17002517 .

v t e X-linked disorders X-linked recessive Immune Chronic granulomatous disease (CYBB) Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency X-linked agammaglobulinemia Hyper-IgM syndrome type 1 IPEX X-linked lymphoproliferative disease Properdin deficiency Hematologic Haemophilia A Haemophilia B X-linked sideroblastic anemia Endocrine Androgen insensitivity syndrome / Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy KAL1 Kallmann syndrome X-linked adrenal hypoplasia congenita Metabolic Amino acid : Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency Oculocerebrorenal syndrome Dyslipidemia : Adrenoleukodystrophy Carbohydrate metabolism : Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency Danon disease/glycogen storage disease Type IIb Lipid storage disorder : Fabry disease Mucopolysaccharidosis : Hunter syndrome Purine–pyrimidine metabolism : Lesch–Nyhan syndrome Mineral : Menkes disease / Occipital horn syndrome Nervous system X-linked intellectual disability : Coffin–Lowry syndrome MASA syndrome Alpha-thalassemia mental retardation syndrome PHF8 Eye disorders: Color blindness (red and green, but not blue) Ocular albinism ( 1 ) Norrie disease Choroideremia Other: Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease (CMTX2-3) Pelizaeus–Merzbacher disease SMAX2 Skin and related tissue Dyskeratosis congenita Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (EDA) X-linked ichthyosis X-linked endothelial corneal dystrophy Neuromuscular Becker muscular dystrophy / Duchenne Centronuclear myopathy (MTM1) Conradi–Hünermann syndrome Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy 1 Urologic Alport syndrome Dent's disease X-linked nephrogenic diabetes insipidus Bone / tooth AMELX Amelogenesis imperfecta No primary system Barth syndrome McLeod syndrome Smith–Fineman–Myers syndrome Simpson–Golabi–Behmel syndrome Mohr–Tranebjærg syndrome Nasodigitoacoustic syndrome X-linked dominant X-linked hypophosphatemia Focal dermal hypoplasia Fragile X syndrome Aicardi syndrome Incontinentia pigmenti Rett syndrome CHILD syndrome Lujan–Fryns syndrome Orofaciodigital syndrome 1 Craniofrontonasal dysplasia Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sex_linkage&oldid=1304122423 " Categories : Genetics Sex Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 CS1 errors: missing periodical CS1 errors: requires URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2020 This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 03:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sex linkage 24 languages Add topic

