Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Intermodal freight containers 2 Corrugated box 3 Wooden box 4 Crate 5 Intermediate bulk shipping container Toggle Intermediate bulk shipping container subsection 5.1 Flexible intermediate bulk container 6 Bulk box 7 Drum 8 Insulated 9 Pail 10 Unit load device 11 Specialized Toggle Specialized subsection 11.1 Transit and flight cases 11.2 Road cases 12 Re-use Toggle Re-use subsection 12.1 Reuse of intermodal steel shipping containers 12.2 Reefer container housing units 13 See also 14 References 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Shipping container 9 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch Deutsch فارسی Қазақша 日本語 Plattdüütsch Slovenščina Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Heavy duty container used for shipping This article is about packaging in general. For 20- and 40-ft-long [6 and 12 m] metal boxes, see intermodal container .

40 foot container A shipping container is a container with strength suitable to withstand shipment, storage, and handling. Shipping containers range from large reusable steel boxes used for intermodal shipments to the ubiquitous corrugated boxes . In the context of international shipping trade, "container" or "shipping container" is virtually synonymous with " intermodal freight container " (sometimes informally called a "sea can"), a container designed to be moved from one mode of transport to another without unloading and reloading.

[ 1 ] Intermodal freight containers [ edit ] Main articles: Intermodal container , Twenty-foot equivalent unit , Intermodal freight transport , and Containerization This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( July 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A flatcar with a 20 ft tanktainer and an open-top 20 ft container with canvas cover Freight containers are a reusable transport and storage unit for moving products and raw materials between locations or countries. There are about seventeen million intermodal containers in the world, and a large proportion of the world's long-distance freight generated by international trade is transported in shipping containers. In addition, it is estimated that several million of these containers have now been discarded due to the shipping cost of sending them back to their port of origin. Their invention made a major contribution to the globalization of commerce in the second half of the 20th century, dramatically reducing the cost of transporting goods and hence of long-distance trade.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Specialized shipping containers include: high cube containers (providing an extra 1 ft (305 mm) in height to standard shipping containers), pallet wides, open tops, side loaders, double door or tunnel-tainers, and temperature controlled containers. Another specialized container, known as Transtainer, is a portable fuel and oil freight container. The hybrid bulk fuel tank is originally intended for the construction, mining, logging and farming sectors. The tank can be used to transport and store bulk fuels as well as dangerous liquids, by road, rail and sea.

[ 4 ] Sea containers are crucial for modern logistics, offering a cost-effective storage and shipping solution. These durable containers, designed for international transportation, provide secure storage for goods with robust steel construction. Beyond shipping, they find applications in on-site storage and modular living or workspaces. Sea containers for sale provide an accessible and convenient solution, meeting diverse needs and promoting sustainability through their reuse.

Reusable steel boxes for use as truck-sized shipping containers first came into use around 1956. It took some time for businesses to devise a structured process to utilize and to get optimal benefits from the role and use of shipping containers. Over time, the invention of the modern telecommunications of the late 20th-century made it highly beneficial to have standardized shipping containers, and made these shipping processes more standardized, modular, easier to schedule and easier to manage.

[ 5 ] Corrugated box [ edit ] Main articles: Corrugated fiberboard and Corrugated box design Typical corrugated box (RSC) Corrugated boxes are commonly used as shipping containers [ 6 ] (more than 90% of all shipping containers are of this type).

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] They are made of corrugated fiberboard which is lightweight, recyclable, and strong enough to ship a variety of products.

Wooden box [ edit ] Main article: Wooden box Wooden boxes are often used for shipping heavy and dense products. They are sometimes specified for shipments of government or military shipments.

Crate [ edit ] Main article: Crate Military shipping crate A crate is a large container, often made of wood, used to transport large, heavy or awkward items. A crate has a self-supporting structure, with or without sheathing.

Reusable plastic versions include: Euro container Systainer , for shipping tools.

Intermediate bulk shipping container [ edit ] Main article: Intermediate bulk container A typical IBC .

An intermediate bulk container (IBC, IBC Tote, IBC Tank) is a multi-use container employed for the general transport, storage, and handling of bulk fluids and materials. IBC tanks are compatible with, and resistant to, an extensive list of chemicals, acids, caustics, as well as inert materials and food grade consumables. IBCs are commonly manufactured from the following materials: Plastic (high-density polyethylene) Composite: steel and plastic Carbon steel Stainless steel (304 and 316/316L SS grades) Some IBC engineering models are foldable (collapsible) for space-saving breakdown following use.

Flexible intermediate bulk container [ edit ] Main article: Flexible intermediate bulk container A flexible intermediate bulk container, FIBC , big bag , bulk bag , or super sack is a standardized container in large dimensions for storing and transporting granular products.  It is often made of a woven synthetic material.

Bulk box [ edit ] Main article: Bulk box A bulk box, bulk bin, skid box, or tote box is a pallet size box used for storage and shipping of bulk quantities.

Drum [ edit ] Main article: Drum (container) Example of steel drum Drums are cylindrical shipping containers made of steel, plastic or fiber. They are often used for liquids and granular materials.

Insulated [ edit ] Main article: Insulated shipping container Insulated shipping containers are a type of packaging used to ship temperature sensitive products such as foods, pharmaceuticals, and chemicals. They are used as part of a cold chain to help maintain product freshness and efficacy.

Pail [ edit ] Main article: Pail (container) Some pails are used as shipping containers.

[ 8 ] Unit load device [ edit ] A "LD3-45" unit load device on a trailer Main article: Unit Load Device A Unit Load Device (ULD), is a container used to transport cargo on commercial aircraft. It can be a pallet or container used to load luggage, freight, and mail on wide-body aircraft and specific narrow-body aircraft. It allows a large quantity of cargo to be bundled into a single unit. Since this leads to fewer units to load, it saves ground crews time and effort and helps prevent delayed flights. Each ULD has its own packing list, manifest, or tracking identification to improve control and tracking of contents Specialized [ edit ] A container for shipping weapons, with carrying handles Custom containers are used for shipments of products such as scientific instruments, weapons and aviation components.

[ 9 ] Customized cushioning , blocking and bracing, carrying handles, lift rings, locks, etc. are common to facilitate handling and to protect the contents. Often, these shipping containers are reusable.

The reusable ifco tray ("international fruit container") is used in Europe for transportation of fruit, vegetables, and fish.

Transit and flight cases [ edit ] Main articles: transit case and flightcase Flight cases and transit cases are usually custom designed for shipping and carrying fragile equipment: audio visual, camera, instruments, etc.  Although generally light in construction, they tend to have reinforced edges and corners.

Road cases [ edit ] Main article: Road case Road cases are often used for shipping musical instruments and theater props.

Re-use [ edit ] Main articles: Reusable packaging , Closed-loop box reuse , Shipping container architecture , and Containerized housing unit A steel cage or rack commonly used in auto industry Student apartments built out of shipping containers in Le Havre, France Transport truck of the Swiss Army with field hospital in container.

Many types of shipping containers are reusable. Steel drums are frequently reconditioned and reused. Gas cylinders, transit cases and sometimes even corrugated boxes are reused.

See also: Container Park Reuse of intermodal steel shipping containers [ edit ] The widespread availability and relative cheapness of used intermodal shipping containers meant that architects began to consider them as an alternative to traditional building materials.

[ 10 ] Used shipping containers have been converted for use in housing, and as retail and office spaces.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Examples of its use include the Cité A Docks student housing project in Le Havre , France; [ 13 ] the Wenckehof container village in Amsterdam; [ 14 ] the portable Puma City store in US cities; [ 15 ] [ 16 ] the food and retail Boxpark in London; [ 17 ] the Dordoy Bazaar in Bishkek , Kyrgyzstan; [ 18 ] the temporary mall Re:START in Christchurch , New Zealand built after the 2011 Christchurch earthquake , [ 19 ] and as intensive-care units in temporary hospitals during the COVID-19 pandemic .

[ 20 ] The Smoky Park Supper Club in Asheville, North Carolina , opened in 2015, was constructed from 19 containers and is considered " "America's largest recycled shipping container restaurant." [ 21 ] It has however been pointed out there are problems with recycling shipping containers, that it may not be as ecologically friendly or cheap an option as it might appear. The containers may be coated with harmful chemicals such as chromate, phosphorus, and lead-based paints, while its wooden floors may be treated with toxic insecticides, and some cost and effort are involved in modifying containers to make them habitable.

[ 10 ] Others have noted various issues such as space constraint, insulation, and structural weakness if too much steel is cut out of the containers.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Shipping containers are used in the film and television industry for building temporary sets. Shipping containers can be stacked on top of each other and used as reinforced scaffold that large-scale film sets can be built against. An example can be seen at Leavesden Studios , England; an area of the studio backlot is allocated to spare containers when not in use.

[ citation needed ] Reefer container housing units [ edit ] See also: Containerized housing unit 53 foot reefer container home Reefer containers or refrigerated containers are containers built to haul refrigerated or frozen products. These containers can be repurposed for container housing or prefabricated for housing purposes. The advantage is the insulation in the walls, ceiling, and floor compared to corrugated metal in standard shipping containers that can get very hot or cold from the weather outside.

Prefabricated reefer containers with the wiring ran through the walls and the plumbing ran through the ceiling and floor before the insulation, interior walls, and floors are installed would be more practical than trying to do that with a repurposed used reefer container.

[ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Containerization Container garden Euro container Dumpster Fumigation Intermodal container Logistics Nuclear flask NYC container Packaging Pallet Roll trailer Shed Sidelifter - Specialized vehicle for shipping containers.

Skip (container) Dutch flower bucket References [ edit ] ^ Dictionary of International Trade : "Container: ... must be b) specially designed to facilitate the carriage of goods by one or more modes of transport without intermediate reloading. ... Ocean shipping containers are generally 10, 20, 30, or 40 feet long ... and conform to ISO standards" ^ Levinson, Marc.

"Sample Chapter for Levinson, M.: The Box: How the Shipping Container Made the World Smaller and the World Economy Bigger" .

The Box: How the Shipping Container Made the World Smaller and the World Economy Bigger . Princeton University Press. Archived from the original on 22 January 2013 . Retrieved 17 February 2013 .

^ Gittins, Ross.

"How the invention of a box changed our world – Business – smh.com.au" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved 17 February 2013 .

^ Portable fuel, oil freight container ^ " The history of the metal box that's wrecking the supply chain ", Rebecca Heilweil, Dec 14, 2021, Vox.

^ a b Dennis, William T. (December 2011).

Parcel and Small Package Delivery Industry . William Dennis.

ISBN 978-1-4610-2154-4 .

^ Pahl, Greg (2000-12-01).

The Complete Idiot's Guide to Saving the Environment . Penguin.

ISBN 978-0-02-863982-6 .

^ Uniform Freight Classification: Ratings, Rules and Regulations Applicable to Freight Traffic Covered by Tariffs Governed by the Uniform Freight Classification, as Such Tariffs May Specify . 1961.

^ MIL-STD-648D, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE DESIGN CRITERIA STANDARD, SPECIALIZED SHIPPING CONTAINERS (PDF) , 10 April 2008 , retrieved 26 April 2018 ^ a b Pagnotta, Brian (29 August 2011).

"The Pros and Cons of Cargo Container Architecture" .

Arch Daily .

^ Morgen Bromell; Evelyn Lee; Maria Cohn (13 March 2013).

"The 25 Coolest Structures Made From Shipping Containers" .

Complex .

^ Riley, Tess.

"Shipping container architecture – in pictures" .

The Guardian .

^ "Cité A Docks Student Housing by Cattani Architects" .

Contemporist . September 30, 2010.

^ Forrest, Adam (9 October 2015).

"Living in a steel box: are shipping containers really the future of housing?" .

The Guardian .

^ LOT-EK (2012).

UPCYCLE . Lulu.com. p. 20.

ISBN 978-1-105-96793-1 .

^ Yuka Yoneda (4 May 2009).

"Puma City Shipping Container Store Comes to Boston's Fan Pier" .

Inhabitat .

^ Fry, Simon (26 January 2017).

"Boxing clever: The firms based in shipping containers" . BBC.

^ Sershen, Daniel (4 January 2007).

" 'Made in China' moves into Russia's backyard" .

Christian Science Monitor .

^ Martin Van Beynen (19 October 2011).

"Christchurch pop-up mall may be world first" .

stuff . Fairfax Media.

^ Wainwright, Oliver (27 March 2020).

"Architect in Italy turns shipping containers into hospitals for treating Covid-19" .

The Guardian .

^ Kennell, Tiana (28 November 2023).

"Executive chef, partners exit RAD restaurant, changes coming in the new year" .

Asheville Citizen-Times .

^ Alter, Lloyd (28 June 2016).

"Shipping container pavilion lets it all hang out" .

Treehugger .

^ "5 Mistakes To Avoid When Building A Shipping Container Home" .

Container Home Plan .

^ "Refrigerated Containers: Good to Build With? - Discover Containers" . 5 February 2018.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Shipping containers .

ASTM Shipping Container Standards and Related Technical Material, 5th edition, 2007, ASTM McKinlay, A. H., "Transport Packaging", Institute of Packaging Professionals, 2004 Yam, K.L., "Encyclopedia of Packaging Technology", John Wiley & Sons, 2009, ISBN 978-0-470-08704-6 v t e Packaging General topics Active packaging Child-resistant packaging Contract packager Edible packaging Modified atmosphere/modified humidity packaging Overpackaging Package delivery Package pilferage Package testing Package theft Packaging engineering Resealable packaging Reusable packaging Reuse of bottles Shelf life Shelf-ready packaging Shelf-stable Sustainable packaging Tamper-evident Tamper resistance Wrap rage Product packages Alternative wine closure Ammunition box Banana box Beer bottle Box wine Case-ready meat Coffee bag Cosmetic packaging Currency packaging Disposable food packaging Drink can Egg carton Evidence packaging Field ration Flour sack Foam food container Food packaging Fuel container Gas cylinder Glass milk bottle Growler Juicebox Low plastic water bottle Luxury packaging Milk bag Optical disc packaging Oyster pail Popcorn bag Pharmaceutical packaging Pizza box Plastic milk container Purdue Improved Crop Storage bags Sand bag Seasonal packaging Self-heating food packaging Screw cap (wine) Single-serve coffee container Spray paint Toothpaste pump dispenser Unit dose Water bottle Wine bottle Containers Aerosol spray dispenser Aluminium bottle Aluminum can Ampoule Antistatic bag Bag-in-box Bag Barrel Biodegradable bag Blister pack Boil-in-bag Bottle Box Bulk box Cage Case Carboy Carton Chub Clamshell Corrugated box design Crate Disposable cup Drum Endcap Envelope Euro container Flexible intermediate bulk container Flexible tank Folding carton Glass bottle Gunny sack Inhaler Insulated shipping container Intermediate bulk container Jar Jerrycan Jug Keg Mesh bag Multilayered packaging Multi-pack Packet (container) Padded envelope Pail Paper bag Paper sack Plastic bag Plastic bottle Retort pouch Salvage drum Sachet Water sachet Security bag Shipping container Shipping tube Skin pack Spray bottle Squround Stand-up pouch Steel and tin cans Tetra Brik Thermal bag Tub (container) Tube Unit load Vial Wooden box Materials and components Adhesive Aluminium foil Bail handle Bioplastic Biodegradable plastic BoPET Bubble wrap Bung Cellophane Closure Coated paper Coating Coextrusion Container glass Corrugated fiberboard Corrugated plastic Cushioning Desiccant Double seam Flip-top Foam peanut Gel pack Hot-melt adhesive Humidity indicator card Kraft paper Label Lid Linear low-density polyethylene Liquid packaging board Living hinge Low-density polyethylene Meat absorbent pad Metallised film Modified atmosphere Molded pulp Nonwoven fabric Overwrap Oxygen scavenger Package handle Packaging gas Pallet Paper Paper pallet Paperboard Plastic-coated paper Plastic film Plastic pallet Plastic wrap Polyester Polyethylene Polypropylene Pressure-sensitive tape Pump dispenser Screw cap Screw cap (wine) Security printing Security tape Shock detector Shock and vibration data logger Shrink wrap Slip sheet Staple (fastener) Strapping Stretch wrap Susceptor Tamper-evident band Tear tape Temperature data logger Time temperature indicator Tinplate Velostat Processes Aseptic processing Authentication Automatic identification and data capture Blow fill seal Blow molding Calendering Canning Coating Containerization Converting Corona treatment Curtain coating Die cutting Die forming (plastics) Electronic article surveillance Extrusion Extrusion coating Flame treatment Glass production Graphic design Hazard analysis and critical control points Hermetic seal Induction sealing Injection moulding Lamination Laser cutting Molding Package tracking Papermaking Plastic extrusion Plastic welding Printing Product development Production control Quality assurance Radio-frequency identification Roll slitting Shearing (manufacturing) Thermoforming Track and trace Ultrasonic welding Vacuum forming Vacuum packaging Verification and validation Machinery Barcode printer Barcode reader Bottling line Calender Can seamer Cap torque tester Cartoning machine Case sealer Check weigher Conveyor system Drum pump Extended core stretch wrapper Filler Heat gun Heat sealer Industrial robot Injection molding machine Label printer applicator Lineshaft roller conveyor Logistics automation Material-handling equipment Mechanical brake stretch wrapper Multihead weigher Orbital stretch wrapper Packaging machinery Pallet inverter Palletizer Rotary wheel blow molding systems Seed-counting machine Shrink tunnel Staple gun Tape dispenser Turntable stretch wrapper Vertical form fill sealing machine Environment, post-use Biodegradation Can collecting Closed-loop box reuse Environmental engineering Extended producer responsibility Glass recycling Industrial ecology Life-cycle assessment Litter Packaging waste Paper recycling PET bottle recycling Plastic recycling Recycling Reusable packaging Reverse logistics Source reduction Sustainable packaging Waste management Category: Packaging Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐vhb2t
Cached time: 20250816173126
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.582 seconds
Real time usage: 0.756 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2181/1000000
Revision size: 18953/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 84320/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1836/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 26/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 100059/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.365/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8633883/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  624.923      1 -total
 33.65%  210.287      1 Template:Reflist
 19.88%  124.204      9 Template:Cite_web
 13.87%   86.649      1 Template:Packaging
 13.55%   84.673      1 Template:Navbox
 10.49%   65.544      1 Template:Short_description
  8.08%   50.472      1 Template:Commons_category
  7.75%   48.432      1 Template:Sister_project
  7.56%   47.218      1 Template:More_citations_needed_section
  7.51%   46.961      1 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:22849124:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816173126 and revision id 1306235446. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shipping_container&oldid=1306235446 " Categories : Shipping containers Intermodal containers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2017 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2018 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 17:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shipping container 9 languages Add topic

