Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 British idealists 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References and further reading Toggle the table of contents British idealism 13 languages العربية Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical movement This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( September 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) F. H. Bradley , the most famous British idealist A subset of absolute idealism , British idealism was a philosophical movement that was influential in Britain from the mid-nineteenth century to the early twentieth century. The leading figures in the movement were T. H. Green (1836–1882), F. H. Bradley (1846–1924), and Bernard Bosanquet (1848–1923). They were succeeded by the second generation of J. H. Muirhead (1855–1940), J. M. E. McTaggart (1866–1925), H. H. Joachim (1868–1938), A. E. Taylor (1869–1945), and R. G. Collingwood (1889–1943). The last major figure in the tradition was G. R. G. Mure (1893–1979). Doctrines of early British idealism so provoked the young Cambridge philosophers G. E. Moore and Bertrand Russell that they began a new philosophical tradition, analytic philosophy .

[ 1 ] Overview [ edit ] Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel Hegelianism Works The Phenomenology of Spirit The Science of Logic Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences Elements of the Philosophy of Right Lectures on the Philosophy of History Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion Lectures on the History of Philosophy Lectures on Aesthetics Schools Absolute idealism British idealism German idealism Associations and Societies Hegel-Archiv Internationale Hegel-Gesellschaft Internationale Hegel-Vereinigung Hegel Society of America Hegel Society of Great Britain Centre de recherche et de documentation sur Hegel Journals Hegel-Studien Hegel-Jahrbuch Hegel Bulletin The Owl of Minerva Studia Hegeliana Revista Eletrônica Estudos Hegelianos Related topics Right Hegelians Young Hegelians v t e British idealism was generally marked by several broad tendencies: a belief in an Absolute (a single all-encompassing reality that in some sense formed a coherent and all-inclusive system); the assignment of a high place to reason as both the faculty by which the Absolute's structure is grasped and as that structure itself; and a fundamental unwillingness to accept a dichotomy between thought and object, reality consisting of thought-and-object together in a strongly coherent unity.

British idealism largely developed from the German idealist movement—particularly such philosophers as Immanuel Kant and G. W. F. Hegel , who were characterised by Green, among others, as the salvation of British philosophy after the alleged demise of empiricism .

Thomas Carlyle did much to bring awareness of German idealism to the English-speaking world, and his own contributions were also highly influential on British idealism.

[ 2 ] The movement was a reaction against the thinking of John Locke , David Hume , John Stuart Mill , Henry Sidgwick , and other empiricists and utilitarians .

Up until the early 1860s accurate translations of Hegel's works were not available in Britain. However, this situation changed in 1865 with the publication of James Hutchison Stirling 's book The Secret of Hegel , which is believed to have won significant converts in Britain.

[ 3 ] British idealism was influenced by Hegel at least in broad outline, and undeniably adopted some of Hegel's terminology and doctrines. Examples include not only the aforementioned Absolute, but also a doctrine of internal relations , a coherence theory of truth , and a concept of a concrete universal. Some commentators have also pointed to a sort of dialectical structure in e.g. some of the writings of Bradley. But few of the British idealists adopted Hegel's philosophy wholesale, and his most significant writings on logic seem to have found no purchase whatsoever in their thought. On the other hand, G. R. G. Mure was "a deep student of Hegel" [ 4 ] who "was committed to Hegel's 'central ontological thesis' all his life." [ 5 ] On its political side, the British idealists were largely concerned to refute what they regarded as a brittle and "atomistic" form of individualism , as espoused by e.g.

Herbert Spencer , but also the utilitarianism of J.S. Mill and the 'socialism' of the Fabian Socialism such as Sidney and Beatrice Webb . On the idealist view, humans are fundamentally social beings in a manner and to a degree not adequately recognized by Spencer and his followers, yet individual initiative and 'self-realisation' are also central to their accounts. The British Idealists did not, however, reify the State in the manner that Hegel allegedly did; Green in particular spoke of the individual as the sole locus of value and contended that the State's existence was justified only insofar as it contributed to the realization of value in the lives of individual persons. Figures, such as Green and Bosanquet were active in social reform, as well.

[ 6 ] The hold of British idealism in the United Kingdom weakened when Bertrand Russell and G. E. Moore , who were educated in the British idealist tradition, turned against it. In the late 1950s G. R. G. Mure, in his Retreat From Truth (Oxford 1958), criticized Russell, Ludwig Wittgenstein , and aspects of analytic philosophy from an idealist point of view.

British idealism was influential not only in Britain, but in philosophy throughout the British Empire as well as in East Asia.
Philosophers such as Alfred Hoernlé in South Africa, John Watson in Canada, Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan in India and Yang Changji in China, drew on idealist metaphysics and political philosophy in developing their own idealist views.

[ 7 ] British idealism's influence in the United States was somewhat limited. The early thought of Josiah Royce had something of a neo-Hegelian cast, as did that of a handful of his less famous contemporaries. The American rationalist Brand Blanshard was  strongly influenced by Bradley, Bosanquet, and Green (and other British philosophers). Even this limited influence, though, petered out through the latter half of the twentieth century. However, from the 1990s on, there has been a significant revival in interest in these ideas, as evidenced by, for instance, by the founding of the Michael Oakeshott Association, and renewed attention to the work of Collingwood, Green, and Bosanquet.

British idealists [ edit ] F. H. Bradley J. M. E. McTaggart Bernard Bosanquet T. H. Green Edward Caird John Caird Henry Jones John Stuart Mackenzie J. H. Muirhead William Ritchie Sorley H. H. Joachim R. B. Haldane, 1st Viscount Haldane G. F. Stout James Ward A. E. Taylor Andrew Seth Pringle-Pattison Norman Kemp Smith Sir James Black Baillie May Sinclair R. L. Nettleship W. R. Boyce Gibson John Alexander Smith H. J. Paton James Hutchison Stirling Alexander Campbell Fraser William Wallace Robert Adamson R. G. Collingwood H. Wildon Carr Michael Oakeshott William Temple C. A. Campbell David George Ritchie James Lindsay A. C. Ewing Hastings Rashdall See also [ edit ] Timothy Sprigge List of British philosophers British philosophy Canadian idealism Notes [ edit ] ^ Griffin, Nicholas (2013).

"Russell and Moore's Revolt against British Idealism", in The Oxford handbook of the history of analytic philosophy, edited by Michael Beaney . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

383– 406.

ISBN 9780199238842 .

^ Jordan, Alexander (2019-09-20).

"The Contribution of Thomas Carlyle to British Idealism, c. 1880–1930" .

Scottish Historical Review .

98 : 439– 468.

doi : 10.3366/shr.2019.0428 .

S2CID 204477593 .

^ William J. Mander, British Idealism: A History , Oxford University Press, 2011, pp. 17–18.

^ Weiss, Frederick (July 1971), "Recent Work on Hegel", North American Philosophical Publications , vol. 8, no. 3, pp.

203– 222 ^ Harris, Henry (2007), "Would Hegel Be A 'Hegelian' Today?" , Cosmos and History: The Journal of Natural and Social Philosophy , vol. 3, no.

2– 3, pp.

5– 15 ^ William Sweet, The Moral, Social, and Political Philosophy of British Idealism , Exeter, UK: Imprint Academic, 2009.

^ Heather Ellis and Ulrike Kirchberger, eds., Anglo-German Scholarly Networks in the Long Nineteenth Century , Leiden: Brill, 2014; William Sweet, ed., Biographical encyclopedia of British idealism , London; New York: Continuum, 2010.

References and further reading [ edit ] William Sweet, ed., Biographical Encyclopedia of British Idealism , London; New York: Continuum, 2010.

W. J. Mander, British Idealism: A History , New York, Oxford University Press, 2011.

Colin Tyler, "'All history is the history of thought': competing British idealist historiographies." British Journal for the History of Philosophy 28.3 (2020): 573-593; focus on  T.H. Green, Edward Caird, and F.H. Bradley.

Sorley, William Ritchie . 1920.

A History of English Philosophy .

An idiosyncratic account of English-language philosophy with an emphasis on idealism, later republished as A History of British Philosophy to 1900 .

online 'British Absolute Idealism: From Green to Bradley', in Jeremy Dunham, Iain Hamilton Grant and Sean Watson (eds), Idealism Durham: Acumen, 2011.

v t e Idealism Forms Absolute British Actual Canadian German Italian Monistic Epistemological Platonic Subjective Objective Transcendental Indian Monistic (Shaivism) Magical (thaumaturgic) Buddhist (consciousness-only) Practical Political Related topics Metaphysics Idea Plato's Theory of Ideas Anti-realism Consciousness-only Rationalism Panpsychism Phenomenalism Idealistic pluralism Idealistic Studies Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=British_idealism&oldid=1293292220 " Categories : Idealism British philosophy Modern history of the United Kingdom Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from September 2010 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 31 May 2025, at 22:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents British idealism 13 languages Add topic

