Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Practice Toggle Practice subsection 2.1 Event chart 3 Branches Toggle Branches subsection 3.1 Radical elections 3.2 Mundane elections 3.3 Ephemeral elections 3.3.1 Magical elections 4 References Toggle the table of contents Electional astrology 7 languages 한국어 Nederlands Português Русский Slovenščina Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of astrology used for planning events Astrology Background Worship of heavenly bodies History of astrology Astrology and astronomy Glossary Planets Behenian Classical Zodiac Traditions, types, and systems Astrology and science Astrological age Astrologers Astrological organizations Traditions Babylonian Chinese Hellenistic Hindu Islamic Jewish Tibetan Western Branches Natal Electional Horary Medical Financial Locational Psychological Meteorological Astrological signs Aries Taurus Gemini Cancer Leo Virgo Libra Scorpio Sagittarius Capricorn Aquarius Pisces Symbols Planet Metals v t e Electional astrology , also known as event astrology, is a branch found in most traditions of astrology according to which a practitioner decides the most appropriate time for an event based on the astrological auspiciousness of that time.

[ 1 ] It differs from horary astrology because, while horary astrologers seek to find the answer to a question based on the time the question was asked, electional astrologers seek to find a period of time which will result in the most preferable outcome for an event being planned.

Historically used primarily to schedule battles , electional astrology has been used by its proponents to plan a number of events, including weddings and trips.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Modern discoveries about the true nature of celestial objects has undermined theoretical bases for believing that their motions affect luck , and empirical scientific investigation has shown that predictions and recommendations based on these systems are not accurate.

[ 4 ] : 85, [ 5 ] : 424 Astrology in general counts as a pseudoscience .

[ 6 ] To be considered a pseudoscience, however, astrology must be considered scientifically measurable, which it is not. Astrology is often considered an art or a practice , making the classification of pseudoscience unapplicable.

[ 7 ] History [ edit ] A rudimentary form of electional astrology was used by the Babylonians beginning sometime after the 16th century BCE.  This and other Babylonian forms of astrology were passed on to the Egyptians, and Persians;  Early Vedic astrologers also used a sophisticated form of electional astrology known as Muhurta ( Muhurat ) that was used for choosing the start of yajnas , travel, warfare, marriage and even filmmaking ( muhurat shot ) etc.

Modern electional astrology, as well as most other astrology, can in general be traced directly back to Book Five of Dorotheus of Sidon 's treatises in Greek on the subject, Carmen Astrologicum from the 1st Century CE. This is the oldest treatise on electional astrology.

[ 8 ] Practice [ edit ] In electional astrology, an astrologer is given an event the querent intends to plan.  The astrologer then finds a date and time most auspicious for the event to take place, around which the querent bases the following plans.  The method of coming to these conclusions is based on the relative positions of stars, planets and other celestial bodies at various times.

[ 9 ] : 12 Each celestial body's placement means something particular to the tradition the individual astrologer is using, in combination with the natal chart of the querent.

[ 9 ] : 14 Event chart [ edit ] An event chart is a horoscope that is cast for the date , time and place of a particular event.  Such a chart is interpreted to gain insight into influences surrounding the event and an outlook for possible developments stemming from that event.

[ 10 ] For example, astrologers can erect a chart for a major event, such as a marriage , and interpret it as though the event were a person in its own right. For example, if a chart was cast for the date of one's marriage then the chart would give an indication of what the couple can expect during their married life.  If a chart is cast for a national event then one can interpret the chart to determine influences surrounding the event. This is in contrast to a birth chart , which is calculated for the actual time of a person's birth, but the design and interpretation are similar.

[ 11 ] Branches [ edit ] Elections, or predictions for auspicious times, are usually divided into three branches, which are used depending on the type of event being planned.

[ 9 ] : 12 Radical elections [ edit ] Radical elections rest on the assumption that an election should be performed primarily based on the natal chart of the querent or person for whom the election is being performed.  An underlying assumption of radical elections is that, because each person was born under different astrological conditions, the most auspicious time to hold an event will be different for each.

[ 9 ] : 14–18 Mundane elections [ edit ] Mundane elections involve using prominent mundane horoscopes ("mundane astrology" is concerned with world affairs) in force at the time for which the election is made.

[ 9 ] : 18 Ephemeral elections [ edit ] The most commonly used and distinctive form of election is the ephemeral election.  These involve picking a date for an event based on the position of the celestial bodies in the sky at the moment of the event.  Most of the time, when a person is talking about electional astrology, that person is referring to ephemeral elections.

[ 9 ] : 20 They can be described as "an horary chart set for a certain time in the future.

" [ 3 ] Magical elections [ edit ] Ephemeral elections have been used in ancient and modern times to make talismans and seals.  These items were seen to be imbued with the qualities of the auspicious date during which they were made, and their instruction is commonly found in medieval literature.

References [ edit ] ^ Radu.

"Electional Astrology - definition, examples, limits, reading" .

Astrology Weekly . Retrieved 2020-11-14 .

^ Wiggers, Carol.

"Electional Astrology using Classical/Traditional Methods" .

Traditional Horary Astrology . Retrieved 2020-11-14 .

^ a b Holden, James H. (2006).

History of Horoscopic Astrology .

American Federation of Astrologers . p. 15.

ISBN 0-86690-463-8 .

^ Jeffrey Bennett; Megan Donohue; Nicholas Schneider; Mark Voit (2007).

The cosmic perspective (4th ed.). San Francisco, CA: Pearson/Addison-Wesley. pp.

82–84 .

ISBN 978-0-8053-9283-8 .

^ Zarka, Philippe (2011).

"Astronomy and astrology" .

Proceedings of the International Astronomical Union .

5 (S260): 420– 425.

Bibcode : 2011IAUS..260..420Z .

doi : 10.1017/S1743921311002602 .

^ Goode, Erich (16 August 2013). "8: Paranormalism and Pseudoscience as Deviance". In Pigliucci, Massimo ; Boudry, Maarten (eds.).

Philosophy of Pseudoscience: Reconsidering the Demarcation Problem . Chicago: University of Chicago Press (published 2013). p. 152.

ISBN 9780226051826 . Retrieved 2019-01-15 .

The National Science Board, under the auspices of the National Science Foundation (NSF), sponsored thirteen surveys between 1979 and 2008 that demonstrated an increase in the percentage of Americans who believe that astrology is at least 'not at all' scientific - from 50 to 63 percent. [...] Astrology represents one of the few pseudo-scientific belief systems that in recent years has manifested a decline among the general public. NSF concludes that, given its lack of an evidentiary basis and its invocation of powers unknown by scientists and outside the realm of the natural laws, astrology is a pseudoscience.

^ "Did You Know? The Influence of Astrology on the Science of Astronomy along the Silk Roads | Silk Roads Programme" .

en.unesco.org . Retrieved 2025-06-24 .

^ Holden, James H. (2006).

History of Horoscopic Astrology .

American Federation of Astrologers . p. 43.

ISBN 0-86690-463-8 .

^ a b c d e f Robsen, Vivian E. (2004).

Electional Astrology .

Kessinger Publishing .

ISBN 978-0-7661-8237-0 .

^ Event Astrology-On Event Charts . Astrology Weekly. Accessed March 3rd, 2012.

^ First Meeting Charts . Astrology Weekly. Accessed March 3rd, 2012.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Electional_astrology&oldid=1297192937 " Categories : Astrology by type Pseudoscience Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 17:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Electional astrology 7 languages Add topic

