Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Bibliography 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Charles Guignon Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Charles B. Guignon ) American philosopher Charles Guignon Born Charles Burke Guignon February 1, 1944 Amarillo, TX Died May 23, 2020 (aged 76) Palm Harbor, FL Nationality American Academic background Alma mater University of California, Berkeley Thesis Heidegger and the Structure of Traditional Epistemological Arguments (1979) Doctoral advisor Hubert Dreyfus Other advisors Hans-Georg Gadamer Academic work Discipline Philosophy School or tradition Continental philosophy Institutions University of Texas at Austin University of Vermont University of South Florida Main interests Martin Heidegger existentialism hermeneutics Charles Burke Guignon (February 1, 1944 – May 23, 2020) was an American philosopher and professor emeritus of philosophy at the University of South Florida .

[ 1 ] He is known for his expertise on Martin Heidegger 's philosophy and existentialism .

[ 2 ] He became a member of the Florida Philosophical Association in the early 2000s.

[ 3 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Heidegger and the Problem of Knowledge (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Co., 1983).

Editor, Dostoevsky's "The Grand Inquisitor," with Related Chapters of "The Brothers Karamazov" (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1993). Includes a 40-page editor's introduction.

Co-editor (with D. Pereboom), Existentialism: Basic Writings (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1995). Book introduction and introductions to Nietzsche and Heidegger.

Editor, The Good Life (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1999). Book introduction and introductions to 25 readings.

(with Frank C. Richardson and Blaine Fowers). Re-envisioning Psychology: Moral Dimensions of Theory and Practice (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1999).

Co-editor (with David C. Hiley). Richard Rorty, “Philosophy in Focus” series (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003).

Editor, The Existentialists (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2004).

On Being Authentic (a volume in the Thinking in Action series) (London: Routledge, 2004).

Editor, Cambridge Companion to Heidegger (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993). Includes editor's introduction and one chapter ("Authenticity, Moral Values, and Psychotherapy"). [Translated in Portuguese and Romanian]. Second enlarged edition, with new editor's Preface: 2006. [Translated into Chinese].

Dostoevsky's "Notes from the Underground", edited with an Introduction (40 pages) with K. Aho (Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett Publishing, 2009).

See also [ edit ] Biography portal Philosophy portal Authenticity (philosophy) The good life Hubert Dreyfus References [ edit ] ^ Nietzsche and Community speakers ^ Heidegger: A (Very) Critical Introduction ^ "MEMBERS" . Florida Philosophical Association . Retrieved April 12, 2014 .

External links [ edit ] Guignon at the USF Philosophy Department Guignon's CV Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX This biography of an American philosopher is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Charles_Guignon&oldid=1297525577 " Categories : 21st-century American philosophers Phenomenologists American epistemologists Hermeneutists Daseinsanalysis Philosophers from Vermont Philosophers from Florida Philosophers from California Philosophers from Texas Existentialists American philosophy academics Heidegger scholars University of South Florida faculty University of Vermont faculty Princeton University faculty University of California, Berkeley alumni University of California, Berkeley faculty University of Texas at Austin faculty 1944 births Living people American philosopher stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from June 2025 Articles with hCards All stub articles This page was last edited on 26 June 2025, at 19:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Charles Guignon Add languages Add topic

