Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Development 2 Content 3 Primary stage of socialism Toggle Primary stage of socialism subsection 3.1 During the Mao era 3.2 After Mao Zedong's death 4 Socialist market economy Toggle Socialist market economy subsection 4.1 Ideological justification 4.2 Private ownership 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Citations 6.2 Sources 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Socialism with Chinese characteristics 32 languages العربية Aragonés 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lombard Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Tiếng Việt 文言 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political theory of the Chinese Communist Party Socialism with Chinese characteristics Simplified Chinese 中国 特色 社会主义 Traditional Chinese 中國 特色 社會主義 Hanyu Pinyin Zhōngguó tèsè shèhuìzhǔyì Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Zhōngguó tèsè shèhuìzhǔyì Bopomofo ㄓㄨㄥ ㄍㄨㄛˊ ㄊㄜˋ ㄙㄜˋ ㄕㄜˋ ㄏㄨㄟˋ ㄓㄨˇ ㄧˋ Wade–Giles Chung 1 -kuo 2 t'e 4 -se 4 she 4 -hui 4 -chu 3 -i 4 Tongyong Pinyin Jhongguó tè-sè shè-huèi-jhǔ-yì IPA [ʈʂʊ́ŋ.kwǒ tʰɤ̂.sɤ̂ ʂɤ̂.xwêɪ.ʈʂù.î] Movements in contemporary Chinese political thought Neoauthoritarianism Chen Yuan Wang Huning Zhang Weiwei Jin Canrong Eric X. Li Gan Yang Jiang Shigong Wu Jiaxiang Xiao Gongqin Zheng Yongnian Hu Xijin Chen Ming Jiang Qing Kang Xiaoguang Yan Xuetong Daniel A. Bell Chen Kuiyuan Zhao Ziyang Bao Tong Li Zehou Liu Zaifu Debateable: Wen Jiabao , Hu Yaobang , Hu Qili , Rong Yiren , Wang Zhengwei , Zhu Rongji and Zhou Xiaochuan Liberalism Ai Weiwei Bao Zunxin Bo Yang Chen Yizi Du Daozheng Fang Fang Fang Lizhi Gao Shangquan Gu Su He Weifang Hu Jiwei Hu Shuli Jin Guantao Kong Qingdong Larry Hsien Ping Lang Li Honglin Li Rui Li Shenzhi Li Yinhe Liu Binyan Liu Xiaobo Mao Yushi Qin Benli Qin Hui Wang Ruoshui Wang Ruowang Wang Yuanhua Wu Jinglian Xu Jilin Xu Youyu Yan Jiaqi Zhang Qianfan Zhang Weiying Zhu Houze Zhu Xueqin New Left Bo Xilai Cui Zhiyuan Dai Jinhua Deng Liqun Gan Yang Gao Mobo Hu Angang Li Minqi Sima Nan Sun Zhengcai Wang Hui Wang Lijun Wang Shaoguang Wang Weizhong Qiu Zhanxuan Yue Xin Zhou Yongkang Socialism with Chinese characteristics Bagatur Bayanqolu Buhe Cai Qi Chen Derong Chen Huanyou Chen Jinhua Chen Liangyu Chen Min'er Chen Xi Chen Xitong Chen Yun Chen Zhili Deng Liqun Deng Xiaoping Deng Yingchao Gao Di Geng Biao Gu Hailiang He Lifeng He Yiting Hu Jintao Hu Chunhua Hu Qiaomu Huang Ju Huang Kunming Huang Xingguo Huo Shilian Ji Lin Jia Qinglin Jia Ting'an Jiang Zemin Leng Rong Li Keqiang Li Peng Li Qiang Li Shulei Li Xi Li Xiannian Li Xuai Li Yuanchao Li Zhanshu Liang Lingguang Lin Huiyong Liu He Liu Jinguo Liu Shuiyuan Liu Tianfu Liu Yandong Liu Yazhou Liu Yunshan Luo Wen Lou Yangsheng Ma Xingrui Pan Yue Peng Zhen Qiao Shi Song Ping Shu Guozeng Sun Chunlan Sun Liancheng Wan Li Wang Qishan Wang Weiguang Wang Xiaohong Wang Xuezhen Wang Yang (politician) Wang Yang (Liaoning politician) Wang Zuo'an Wu Bangguo Wu Shuqing Xi Jinping Xi Yuanping Xi Zhongxun Xia Baolong Xie Fei Xie Fuzhan Xu Kuangdi Ye Xiaowen Ye Xuanping Yi Gang Ying Yong Yu Guangyuan Yu Qiuli Yu Weiguo Yu Yunyao Zhao Leji Zeng Qinghong Zheng Bijian Zhou Qiang Zhong Shaojun Zhu Mingguo Politics of China v t e Socialism with Chinese characteristics ( Chinese : 中国特色社会主义 ; pinyin : Zhōngguó tèsè shèhuìzhǔyì ; Mandarin pronunciation: [ʈʂʊ́ŋ.kwǒ tʰɤ̂.sɤ̂ ʂɤ̂.xwêɪ.ʈʂù.î] ⓘ ) is a set of political theories and policies of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) that are seen by their proponents as representing Marxism adapted to Chinese circumstances.

The term was first established by Deng Xiaoping in 1982 and was largely associated with Deng's overall program of adopting elements of market economics as a means to foster growth using foreign direct investment and to increase productivity (especially in the countryside where 80% of China's population lived) while the CCP retained both its formal commitment to achieve communism and its monopoly on political power.

[ 1 ] In the party's official narrative, socialism with Chinese characteristics is Marxism adapted to Chinese conditions and a product of scientific socialism . The theory stipulated that China was in the primary stage of socialism due to its relatively low level of material wealth and needed to engage in economic growth before it pursued a more egalitarian form of socialism , which in turn would lead to a communist society described in Marxist orthodoxy .

[ 2 ] Socialism with Chinese characteristics consists of a path , a theoretical system , a system and a culture . The path outlines the policies guiding the CCP. The theoretical system consists of Deng Xiaoping Theory , Three Represents ( Jiang Zemin ), Scientific Outlook on Development ( Hu Jintao ), and Xi Jinping Thought . According to CCP doctrine, Xi Jinping Thought is considered to represent Marxist–Leninist policies suited for China's present condition while Deng Xiaoping Theory was considered relevant for the period when it was formulated. The system outlines the political system of China.

Development [ edit ] The term was first used by Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping on 1 September 1982 in the opening speech of the 12th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party .

[ 3 ] Deng said "We must integrate the universal truth of Marxism with the concrete realities of China, and blaze a path of our own and build Socialism with Chinese Characteristics".

[ 4 ] Content [ edit ] Article 1 of the country's constitution states, "Leadership of the Communist Party of China is the defining feature of socialism with Chinese characteristics." [ 5 ] [ 6 ] According to official explanations, Socialism with Chinese characteristics consists of a "path", a "theoretical system", a "system", and a "culture": [ 4 ] The path of socialism with Chinese characteristics establishes that, under the CCP's leadership, China must base it on the basic national conditions, focus on economic development, adhere to the Four Cardinal Principles and to Reform and Opening Up , liberate and develop social productive forces, construct a " socialist market economy , socialist democratic politics, socialist advanced culture, socialist harmonious society and socialist ecological civilization ," promote the development of people, gradually realize common prosperity , build a "prosperous, democratic, civilized, harmonious, and beautiful socialist modern country", and achieve the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation .

[ 7 ] The theoretical system of socialism with Chinese characteristics is the "scientific theoretical system", consisting of Deng Xiaoping Theory , Three Represents , Scientific Outlook on Development , and Xi Jinping Thought . It is officially described as the inheritance and development of Marxism–Leninism and Mao Zedong Thought .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The system of socialism with Chinese characteristics includes the system of people's congresses , the system of multi-party cooperation and political consultation under the leadership of the CCP , the system of regional ethnic autonomy , and the system of community-level self-governance . It additionally includes the socialist legal system with Chinese characteristics , the socialist market economic system, and various other systems in the economy, politics, culture and society.

[ 7 ] According to CCP General Secretary Xi Jinping , the leadership of the CCP is "the greatest strength of the system of socialism with Chinese characteristics".

[ 4 ] The culture of socialism with Chinese characteristics , according to the 19th CCP National Congress , "originates from the excellent traditional Chinese culture nurtured by the Chinese nation's 5,000-year history of civilization, fusing with the revolutionary culture and the advanced socialist culture created by the Party in leading the people in revolution, construction and reform".

[ 9 ] It officially aims to "cultivate citizens with ideals, morality, culture and discipline, and develop a national, scientific and popular socialist culture that is oriented towards modernization, the world and the future".

[ 7 ] Primary stage of socialism [ edit ] Main article: Primary stage of socialism During the Mao era [ edit ] The concept of a primary stage of socialism was conceived before the People's Republic of China introduced economic reforms .

[ 10 ] In the early 1950s, economists Yu Guangyuan , Xue Muqiao and Sun Yefang raised the question of socialist transformation in which China's economy of low productive force was in a transitional period, a position which Mao Zedong , the Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party , endorsed briefly until 1957. When discussing the necessity of commodity relations at the 1st Zhengzhou Conference (2–10 November 1958), for example, Mao said that China was in the "initial stage of socialism".

[ 10 ] However, Mao never elaborated on the idea and his successors were left to do this.

[ 10 ] After Mao Zedong's death [ edit ] Some have called our road " Social Capitalism ", others " State Capitalism ", and yet others "Technocratic Capitalism". These are all completely wrong. We respond that socialism with Chinese characteristics is socialism , by which we mean that despite reform we adhere to the socialist road – our road, our theory, our system, and the goals we set out at the 18th National Party Congress . ... Socialism with Chinese characteristics is the dialectical unity of the theoretical logic of scientific socialism and the historical logic of China's social development. It's scientific socialism rooted in Chinese realities, reflecting the will of Chinese people, and adapted to the requirements of China and its circumstances.

— Xi Jinping , speech to the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party , 5 January 2013 [ 11 ] On 5 May 1978, the article "Putting into Effect the Socialist Principle of Distribution According to Work" ( 贯彻执行按劳分配的社会主义原则 ) elaborated on the idea that China was still at the first stage of reaching a communist society [ 12 ] and that it had not become a truly socialist society.

[ 12 ] The article was written by members in the State Council 's Political Research Office led by economist Yu Guangyuan on the orders of Deng Xiaoping so as to "criticize and repudiate" the beliefs of the communist left.

[ 13 ] After reading it, Deng himself authored a brief memo saying that it was "well-written, and shows that the nature of distribution by labor is not capitalist , but socialist [...] [and] to implement this principle, many things are to be done, and many institutions to be revived. In all, this is to give incentives for us to do better".

[ 14 ] The term reappeared at the 6th plenum of the 11th Central Committee on 27 June 1981 in the document "Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of our Party since the Founding of the PRC".

[ 15 ] Hu Yaobang , the CCP General Secretary , used the term in his report to the 12th National Congress on 1 September 1982.

[ 15 ] It was not until the "Resolution Concerning the Guiding Principle in Building Socialist Spiritual Civilization" at the 6th plenum of the 12th Central Committee that the term was used in the defense of the economic reforms which were being introduced.

[ 15 ] At the 13th National Congress , acting General Secretary Zhao Ziyang on behalf of the 12th Central Committee delivered the report "Advance Along the Road of Socialism with Chinese characteristics".

[ 16 ] He wrote that China was a socialist society, but that socialism in China was in its primary stage, [ 16 ] a Chinese peculiarity which was due to the undeveloped state of the country's productive forces.

[ 16 ] During this phase of development, Zhao recommended introducing a planned commodity economy on the basis of public ownership .

[ 16 ] The main failure of the communist right according to Zhao was that they failed to acknowledge that China could reach socialism by bypassing capitalism. The main failure of the communist left was that they held the " utopian position " that China could bypass the primary stage of socialism in which the productive forces are to be modernized.

[ 17 ] On 5 October 1987, Yu Guangyuan, a major author of the concept, published an article entitled "Economy in the Initial Stage of Socialism" and speculated that this historical stage will last for two decades and perhaps much longer.

[ 18 ] This represents, says Ian Wilson, "a severe blight on the expectations raised during the early 70s, when the old eight-grade wage scale was being compressed to only three levels and a more even distributive system was assumed to be an important national goal". On 25 October, Zhao further expounded on the concept of the primary stage of socialism and said that the party line was to follow "One Center, Two Basic Points"—the central focus of the Chinese state was economic development, but that this should occur simultaneously through centralized political control (i.e. the Four Cardinal Principles ) and upholding the policy of reform and opening up.

[ 15 ] General Secretary Jiang Zemin further elaborated on the concept ten years later, first during a speech to the CCP Central Party School on 29 May 1997 and again in his report to the 15th National Congress on 12 September.

[ 15 ] According to Jiang, the 3rd plenum of the 11th Central Committee correctly analyzed and formulated a scientifically correct program for the problems facing China and socialism.

[ 15 ] In Jiang's words, the primary stage of socialism was an "undeveloped stage".

[ 15 ] The fundamental task of socialism is to develop the productive forces, therefore the main aim during the primary stage should be the further development of the national productive forces.

[ 15 ] The primary contradiction in Chinese society during the primary stage of socialism is "the growing material and cultural needs of the people and the backwardness of production".

[ 15 ] This contradiction will remain until China has completed the process of primary stage of socialism—and because of it—economic development should remain the party's main focus during this stage.

[ 15 ] Jiang elaborated on three points to develop the primary stage of socialism.

[ 19 ] The first—to develop a socialist economy with Chinese characteristics—meant developing the economy by emancipating and modernizing the forces of production while developing a market economy .

[ 19 ] The second—building socialist politics with Chinese characteristics—meant "managing state affairs according to the law", developing socialist democracy under the party and making the "people the masters of the country".

[ 19 ] The third point—building socialist culture with Chinese characteristics—meant turning Marxism into the guide to train the people so as to give them "high ideals, moral integrity, a good education, and a strong sense of discipline, and developing a national scientific, and popular socialist culture geared to the needs of modernization, of the world, and of the future".

[ 19 ] When asked about how long the primary stage of socialism would last, Zhao replied "[i]t will be at least 100 years [...] [before] socialist modernization will have been in the most part accomplished".

[ 20 ] The state constitution states that "China will be in the primary stage of socialism for a long time to come".

[ 21 ] As with Zhao, Jiang believed that it would take at least 100 years to reach a more advanced stage.

[ 15 ] Socialist market economy [ edit ] Main article: Socialist market economy What is socialism and what is Marxism? We were not quite clear about this in the past. Marxism attaches utmost importance to developing the productive forces. We have said that socialism is the primary stage of communism and that at the advanced stage the principle of from each according to his ability and to each according to his needs will be applied. This calls for highly developed productive forces and an overwhelming abundance of material wealth. Therefore, the fundamental task for the socialist stage is to develop the productive forces. The superiority of the socialist system is demonstrated, in the final analysis, by faster and greater development of those forces than under the capitalist system. As they develop, the people's material and cultural life will constantly improve. One of our shortcomings after the founding of the People's Republic was that we didn't pay enough attention to developing the productive forces. Socialism means eliminating poverty. Pauperism is not socialism, still less communism.

— Deng Xiaoping , speech discussing Marxist theory at a Central Committee plenum, 30 June 1984 [ 22 ] Deng Xiaoping, the architect of the Chinese economic reforms , did not believe that the market economy was synonymous with capitalism or that planning was synonymous with socialism.

[ 23 ] During his southern tour, he said that "planning and market forces are not the essential difference between socialism and capitalism. A planned economy is not the definition of socialism, because there is planning under capitalism; the market economy happens under socialism, too. Planning and market forces are both ways of controlling economic activity".

[ 23 ] Ideological justification [ edit ] In the 1980s, it became evident to Chinese economists that the Marxist theory of the law of value —understood as the expression of the labor theory of value —could not serve as the basis of China's pricing system.

[ 24 ] They concluded that Marx never intended his theory of law of value to work "as an expression of 'concretized labor time ' ".

[ 24 ] Marx's notion of "prices of production" was meaningless to the Soviet-styled planned economies since price formations were according to Marx established by markets.

[ 25 ] Soviet planners had used the law of value as a basis to rationalize prices in the planned economy.

[ 26 ] According to Soviet sources, prices were "planned with an eye to the [...] basic requirements of the law of value".

[ 26 ] However, the primary fault with the Soviet interpretation was that they tried to calibrate prices without a competitive market since according to Marx competitive markets allowed for an equilibrium of profit rates which led to an increase in the prices of production .

[ 27 ] The rejection of the Soviet interpretation of the law of value led to the acceptance of the idea that China was still in the primary stage of socialism.

[ 26 ] The basic argument was that conditions envisaged by Marx for reaching the socialist stage of development did not yet exist in China.

[ 26 ] Mao said that the imposition of "progressive relations of production " would revolutionize production.

[ 28 ] His successor's rejection of this view according to A. James Gregor has thwarted the ideological continuity of Maoism —officially Mao Zedong Thought.

[ 28 ] Classical Marxism had argued that a socialist revolution would only take place in advanced capitalist societies and its success would signal the transition from a capitalist commodity -based economy to a "product economy" in which goods would be distributed for people's need and not for profit.

[ 28 ] If because of a lack of a coherent explanation in the chance of failure this revolution did not occur, the revolutionaries would be forced to take over the responsibilities of the bourgeoisie .

[ 28 ] Chinese communists are thus looking for a new Marxist theory of development.

[ 28 ] CCP theorist Luo Rongqu recognized that the founders of Marxism had never "formulated any systematic theory on the development of the non-Western world" and said that the CCP should "establish their own synthesized theoretical framework to study the problem of modern development".

[ 29 ] According to A. James Gregor, the implication of this stance is that "Chinese Marxism is currently in a state of profound theoretical discontinuity".

[ 30 ] According to academics Xinru Ma and David C. Kang, socialism with Chinese characteristics is restricted to China itself and focuses on China's own ideology and practices.

[ 31 ] : 181 Ma and Kang write that in its foreign relations with other Global South countries, China does not attempt to export the ideology of Socialism with Chinese characteristics.

[ 31 ] : 181 Private ownership [ edit ] The Chinese government's understanding of private ownership is claimed to be rooted in classical Marxism.

[ 32 ] According to party theorists, since China adopted state ownership when it was a semi-feudal and semi-colonial country, it is claimed to be in the primary stage of socialism.

[ 32 ] Because of this, certain policies and system characteristics—such as commodity production for the market, the existence of a private sector and the reliance of the profit motive in enterprise management—were changed.

[ 32 ] These changes were allowed as long as they improved productivity and modernized the means of production , thus furthering the development of socialism.

[ 32 ] The CCP still considers private ownership to be non-socialist.

[ 33 ] However, according to party theorists, the existence and growth of private ownership does not necessarily undermine socialism or promote capitalism in China.

[ 33 ] They argue that Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels never proposed the immediate abolishment of private ownership.

[ 33 ] According to Engels' book Principles of Communism , the proletariat can only abolish private ownership when the necessary conditions have been met.

[ 33 ] In the phase before the abolishment of private ownership, Engels proposed progressive taxation, high inheritance taxes and compulsory bond purchases to restrict private property, while using the competitive powers of state-owned enterprises to expand the public sector .

[ 33 ] Marx and Engels proposed similar measures in The Communist Manifesto with regard to advanced countries, but since China was economically undeveloped, party theorists called for flexibility regarding the party's handling of private property.

[ 33 ] According to party theorist Liu Shuiyuan, the New Economic Policy program initiated by Soviet authorities in the aftermath of the war communism program is a good example of flexibility by socialist authorities.

[ 33 ] Party theorist Li Xuai said that private ownership inevitably involved capitalist exploitation .

[ 33 ] However, Li regards private property and exploitation as necessary in the primary stage of socialism, stating that capitalism in its primary stage uses remnants of the old society to build itself.

[ 33 ] Sun Liancheng and Lin Huiyong said that Marx and Engels—in their interpretation of The Communist Manifesto —criticized private ownership when it was owned solely by the bourgeoisie, but not individual ownership in which everyone owns the means of production, hence this cannot be exploited by others.

[ 34 ] Individual ownership is considered consistent with socialism, since Marx wrote that a post-capitalist society would entail the rebuilding of "associated social individual ownership".

[ 35 ] See also [ edit ] China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Ideology of the Chinese Communist Party Revisionism (Marxism) Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Socialism in one country Socialist market economy State capitalism Party-state capitalism References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Xiaoping, Deng (1 October 1984).

"Building Socialism with a Specifically Chinese Character" .

People's Daily .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2018 . Retrieved 3 July 2018 .

^ "Deng Xiaoping: Let part of people get rich first" .

Shanghai Fengqi . Archived from the original on 29 July 2021 . Retrieved 17 July 2020 .

^ Gang, Qian (28 September 2012).

" "中国特色社会主义"是个筐" [“Socialism with Chinese characteristics” is a basket].

The New York Times . Retrieved 12 February 2025 .

^ a b c "Socialism with Chinese Characteristics" .

The Center for Strategic Translation . American Governance Foundation . Retrieved 12 February 2025 .

^ Guiqing, Xiao (22 June 2016).

"党的领导是中国特色社会主义最本质特征--理论-人民网" [The leadership of the Party is the most essential feature of socialism with Chinese characteristics].

People's Daily (in Chinese) . Retrieved 12 February 2025 .

^ He, Lingnan; Yang, Dali L. (2024). "Political Participation in China: Social Surveys as Windows to Chinese Political Attitude and Behavior". In Zhong, Yang; Inglehart, Ronald (eds.).

China as Number One? The Emerging Values of a Rising Power (EPUB) . China Understandings Today series. Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan Press . p. 126.

ISBN 978-0-472-07635-2 .

^ a b c d "张汉晖大使：什么是中国特色社会主义" [Ambassador Zhang Hanhui: What is socialism with Chinese characteristics?].

Embassy of China, Moscow (in Chinese). 21 May 2021 . Retrieved 12 February 2025 .

^ Laiming, Zhang (24 November 2021).

"形成中国特色社会主义理论体系" [Forming a theoretical system of socialism with Chinese characteristics].

People's Daily (in Chinese) . Retrieved 12 February 2025 .

^ Xingliang, He (12 August 2023).

"中华民族现代文明是什么样的文明" [What kind of civilization is the modern civilization of the Chinese nation?].

People's Daily Forum . Retrieved 12 February 2025 .

^ a b c Li 1995 , p. 400.

^ Jinping, Xi (11 April 2022).

"Regarding the Construction of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics (2013)" .

Redsails.org . Archived from the original on 11 April 2022.

^ a b He 2001 , p. 385.

^ He 2001 , pp. 385–386.

^ "坚持按劳分配原则" [March 28, 1978: Adhere to the principle of distribution according to work].

China Central Television . 16 September 2003.

Archived from the original on 5 December 2004 . Retrieved 4 March 2018 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k He 2001 , p. 386.

^ a b c d Li 1995 , p. 399.

^ Schram 1989 , p. 204.

^ Yu, Guangyuan (5 October 1987). "Economy in the Initial Stage of Socialism".

Zhongguo Shehui Kexue (3).

^ a b c d He 2001 , p. 387.

^ Vogel 2011 , p. 589.

^ 2nd session of the 9th National People's Congress (14 March 2004).

"Constitution of the People's Republic of China" .

Government of the People's Republic of China . Archived from the original on 26 July 2013 . Retrieved 14 January 2013 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Deng, Xiaoping (30 June 1984).

"Building a Socialism with a specifically Chinese character" .

People's Daily .

Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party .

Archived from the original on 16 January 2013 . Retrieved 13 January 2013 .

^ a b "Market fundamentalism' is unpractical" .

People's Daily .

Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party . 3 February 2012. Archived from the original on 22 September 2012 . Retrieved 13 January 2013 .

^ a b Gregor 1999 , p. 114.

^ Gregor 1999 , pp. 114–116.

^ a b c d Gregor 1999 , p. 116.

^ Gregor 1999 , pp. 115–116.

^ a b c d e Gregor 1999 , p. 117.

^ Gregor 1999 , pp. 117–118.

^ Gregor 1999 , p. 118.

^ a b Ma, Xinru; Kang, David C. (2024).

Beyond Power Transitions: The Lessons of East Asian History and the Future of U.S.-China Relations . Columbia Studies in International Order and Politics. New York: Columbia University Press .

ISBN 978-0-231-55597-5 .

^ a b c d Hsu 1991 , p. 11.

^ a b c d e f g h i Hsu 1991 , p. 65.

^ Hsu 1991 , pp. 65–66.

^ Hsu 1991 , p. 66.

Sources [ edit ] Gregor, A. James (1999).

Marxism, China & Development: Reflections on Theory and Reality .

Transaction Publishers .

ISBN 978-0-7658-0634-5 .

He, Henry Yuhuai (2001).

Dictionary of the Political Thought of the People's Republic of China .

M.E. Sharpe .

ISBN 978-0-7656-0569-6 .

Hsu, Robert (1991).

Economic Theories in China, 1979–1988 .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-36567-3 .

Li, Gucheng (1995).

A Glossary of Political Terms of the People's Republic of China .

Chinese University Press .

ISBN 978-962-201-615-6 .

Schram, Stuart (1989).

The Thought of Mao Tse-Tung .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-31062-8 .

Vogel, Ezra (2011).

Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China .

Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-674-05544-5 .

Further reading [ edit ] Library resources about Socialism with Chinese characteristics Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Boer, Roland (2021).

Socialism with Chinese Characteristics: A Guide for Foreigners .

Springer .

ISBN 978-9811616242 .

Gregor, A. James (2014).

Marxism and the Making of China. A Doctrinal History . Palgrave Macmillan.

v t e China articles History Overviews History Timeline Historiography Military history Language Economic before 1912 1912–1949 1949–present Ethnic groups Foreign relations Dynasties Monarchs Prehistoric Paleolithic Neolithic Yellow River Yangtze Liao Ancient Xia Shang Late Zhou Western Zhou Spring and Autumn Warring States Imperial Qin Han Three Kingdoms Wei Han Wu Jin (266–420) Sixteen Kingdoms Northern and Southern dynasties Sui Tang Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Liao Song Jin (1115–1234) Yuan Ming Qing High Qing Century of humiliation Taiping Rebellion Eunuch Modern 1911 Revolution Republic of China Chinese Civil War Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China Cultural Revolution Reform and opening up Tiananmen Square COVID-19 persecution of Uyghurs List of massacres in China Geography Borders Extreme points Geology Natural disasters Regions East Northeast North South Central Central South Western Northwestern Southwestern Terrain Bays Canyons Caves Deserts Grasslands Hills Islands Mountains ranges passes Peninsulas Northeast / North / Central Plains Valleys Volcanoes Water Canals Lakes Rivers Waterfalls Wetlands Water resources Seas Bohai Yellow East China South China Environment Climate change Climate policy Environmental issues Environmental policy Protected areas National parks Nature reserves UNESCO Biosphere Reserves Wildlife Fauna Flora Subdivisions Baseline islands Border crossings Cities Province-level subdivisions Politics Law Judicial system Human rights LGBT in Tibet Law enforcement Penal system Naming laws Nationality law Terrorism Government Civil service Constitution Democracy Pro-democratisation Elections Environmental policy Foreign relations Laogai National People's Congress Standing Committee National security Political parties and movements Chinese Communist Party General Secretary Politburo Democratic parties (China) United front Political Consultative Conference System of multi-party cooperation and political consultation Socialism with Chinese characteristics Primary stage of socialism President Vice President State Council Premier Vice Premier Whole-process people's democracy One country, two systems Military Outline of military history Central Military Commission Cyberwarfare and China Ministry of National Defense People's Liberation Army Ground Navy Air Rocket Strategic Support People's Armed Police Coast Guard Militia Maritime Militia Economy Agriculture Aquaculture Banking Central bank Chinese property sector crisis (2020–present) Currency Economic history Reform and opening up Special economic zones E-commerce Online advertising Economic inequality in China Energy Coal Petroleum Renewable Forced evictions Foreign aid received Foreign aid program Historical GDP Housing Income inequality in China Industry Chemical Gold mining Semiconductors Steel Textiles Labor relations Poverty Real estate Standard of living Taxation Tourism Trade Underoccupied developments Unemployment Infrastructure Architecture Housing Telecommunications Internet Water supply and sanitation Transport Automotive industry Civil aviation Rail Shipping industry Space program Society Abortion Censorship Chinese Dream Chinese language Standard Chinese Written Chinese Crime Corruption Prostitution Sex trafficking Education Literacy Freedom of the press Harmonious Society Health Food safety incidents HIV/AIDS Intellectualism Internment camps Martyrdom Surveillance Propaganda Protest ”Mass incidents” Public holidays Rural society Science and technology history Sexuality Social issues Patriarchy Racism Regional discrimination Suicide Social relations Structure Tang ping Time Urban society Welfare Culture Archaeology Archives Art Calligraphy Cinema Cuisine Dance Libraries Literature Poetry Martial arts Mass media Music Names Philosophy Smoking Sport Tea culture Variety art Major Historical and Cultural Sites World Heritage Sites Fours of China Four Treasures of the Study Four Great Inventions Four Gentlemen Flowers of the Four Seasons Four Beauties Four Classic Novels Four arts Four Symbols Four Holy Beasts Four Pillars of Destiny Four Paragons of the Early Tang Four Masters of the Ming dynasty Four Masters of the Yuan dynasty Four Wangs Gang of Four Four Olds Four Pests campaign Demographics Emigration Ethnic groups Eunuchs Internal migration Languages Life expectancy Statistics Population history " Post-80s " " Post-90s " Urbanization Women Religion Buddhism Chinese Buddhism Tibetan Buddhism Confucianism Folk religion Christianity Catholic Church in China Protestantism Freedom of religion History of religion Irreligion Islam Taoism Symbols Anthem Emblem Flag Outline Index Category Portal v t e Socialism by country By country Argentina Australia New Australia Bangladesh Brazil Lulism Canada China Communist since 1978 Kuomintang Hong Kong Estonia Ethiopia Finland France Greece India Iran Italy Libya Netherlands New Zealand Pakistan Sri Lanka Sweden Tunisia United Kingdom Corbynism United States African-American Venezuela Chavismo Vietnam History United Kingdom United States Regional variants African Arab British Burmese Chinese European Israeli Melanesian Nicaraguan Tanzanian Venezuelan Vietnamese Current and historical socialist states Africa Angola Benin Burkina Faso Congo-Brazzaville Egypt Ethiopia 1974–1987 1987–1991 Guinea Libya Madagascar Mozambique Seychelles Somalia Sudan Americas Barbados Cuba Grenada Chile Nicaragua Asia Afghanistan Burma Cambodia 1975–1979 1979–1992 1982–1992 China Iraq North Korea Laos Mongolia South Yemen Syria Tuva Vietnam North Vietnam Short-lived Azerbaijan People's Government East Turkestan Far East Fujian Gilan Inner Mongolia Jiangxi Kuwait Kurdish Republic of Mahabad North Korea (1946–1947) North Korea (1947–1948) Democratic Republic of Yemen South Vietnam Europe Albania Bulgaria Czechoslovakia Czech Republic Slovakia East Germany Hungary (1949–1989) Poland Romania Soviet Union Yugoslavia Short-lived Alsace-Lorraine Banat Baranya–Baja Bavaria 1918–1919 1919 Bessarabia Byelorussia (1919) Bremen Bihać Crimea (1919) Finland 1918 1939–1940 Estonia (1918–1919) Galicia Hungary (1919) Ireland Naissaar Saxony Slovakia (1919) Tarnobrzeg Užice Würzburg Brussels Soldiers' Council History of socialism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Socialism_with_Chinese_characteristics&oldid=1304462043 " Categories : Socialism with Chinese characteristics Market socialism Ideology of the Chinese Communist Party Economic history of the People's Republic of China Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from April 2013 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use dmy dates from September 2014 Articles containing Chinese-language text This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 05:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Socialism with Chinese characteristics 32 languages Add topic

