Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical background Toggle Historical background subsection 1.1 Earliest inferences 1.2 Morgan's Canon 1.3 From anecdote to laboratory 1.4 The behavioristic half-century 1.5 The cognitive revolution 2 Methods 3 Research questions Toggle Research questions subsection 3.1 Perception 3.2 Attention 3.2.1 Selective Learning 3.2.2 Divided attention 3.2.3 Visual search and attentional priming 3.3 Concepts and categories 3.3.1 Methods 3.3.2 Perceptual categories 3.3.3 Natural categories 3.3.4 Functional or associative categories 3.3.5 Relational or abstract categories 3.3.6 Rule learning 3.4 Memory 3.4.1 Methods 3.4.1.1 Habituation 3.4.1.2 Delayed response 3.4.1.3 Radial arm maze 3.4.1.4 Water maze 3.4.1.5 Novel object recognition test 3.5 Spatial cognition 3.5.1 Long-distance navigation; homing 3.6 Timing 3.6.1 Time of day: circadian rhythms 3.6.2 Interval timing 3.7 Tool and weapon use 3.7.1 Mammals 3.7.2 Birds 3.7.3 Fish 3.7.4 Invertebrates 3.8 Reasoning and problem solving 3.9 Cognitive bias 3.10 Language 3.11 Insight 3.12 Numeracy 3.13 Sapience 3.14 Theory of mind 3.15 Consciousness 4 Biological constraints 5 Experimental evidence against animal cognition 6 Cognitive faculty by species 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Animal cognition 26 languages العربية Беларуская Català Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia עברית Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Português Русский Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Intelligence of non-human animals For the scientific journal, see Animal Cognition .

A crab-eating macaque using a stone tool to crack open a nut Experiments like the string-pulling task performed here by a Carib grackle provide insights into animal cognition.

Animal cognition encompasses the mental capacities of non-human animals , including insect cognition . The study of animal conditioning and learning used in this field was developed from comparative psychology . It has also been strongly influenced by research in ethology , behavioral ecology , and evolutionary psychology ;  the alternative name cognitive ethology is sometimes used. Many behaviors associated with the term animal intelligence are also subsumed within animal cognition.

[ 1 ] Researchers have examined animal cognition in mammals (especially primates , cetaceans , elephants , bears , dogs , cats , pigs , horses , [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] cattle , raccoons and rodents ), birds (including parrots , fowl , corvids and pigeons ), reptiles ( lizards , crocodilians , snakes , and turtles ), [ 5 ] fish and invertebrates (including cephalopods , spiders and insects ).

[ 6 ] Historical background [ edit ] Earliest inferences [ edit ] A monkey drinking Frooti from a juice box using its hands The mind and behavior of non-human animals has captivated the human imagination for centuries. Many writers, such as Descartes , have speculated about the presence or absence of the animal mind.

[ 7 ] These speculations led to many observations of animal behavior before modern science and testing were available. This ultimately resulted in the creation of multiple hypotheses about animal intelligence.

One of Aesop's Fables was The Crow and the Pitcher , in which a crow drops pebbles into a vessel of water until he is able to drink. This was a relatively accurate reflection of the capability of corvids to understand water displacement.

[ 8 ] The Roman naturalist Pliny the Elder was the earliest to attest that said story reflects the behavior of real-life corvids.

[ 9 ] Aristotle , in his biology , hypothesized a causal chain where an animal's sense organs transmitted information to an organ capable of making decisions, and then to a motor organ. Despite Aristotle's cardiocentrism (mistaken belief that cognition occurred in the heart), this approached some modern understandings of information processing .

[ 10 ] Early inferences were not necessarily precise or accurate. Nonetheless, interest in animal mental abilities, and comparisons to humans, increased with early myrmecology , the study of ant behavior, as well as the classification of humans as primates beginning with Linnaeus .

Morgan's Canon [ edit ] Main article: Morgan's Canon Coined by 19th-century British psychologist C. Lloyd Morgan , Morgan's Canon remains a fundamental precept of comparative (animal) psychology . In its developed form, it states that: [ 11 ] In no case is an animal activity to be interpreted in terms of higher psychological processes if it can be fairly interpreted in terms of processes which stand lower in the scale of psychological evolution and development.

In other words, Morgan believed that anthropomorphic approaches to animal behavior were fallacious, and that people should only consider behaviour as, for example, rational, purposive or affectionate, if there is no other explanation in terms of the behaviours of more primitive life-forms to which we do not attribute those faculties.

From anecdote to laboratory [ edit ] See also: Comparative psychology Speculation about animal intelligence gradually yielded to scientific study after Darwin placed humans and animals on a continuum, although Darwin's largely anecdotal approach to the cognition topic would not pass scientific muster later on.

[ 12 ] This method would be expanded by his protégé George J. Romanes , [ 13 ] who played a key role in the defense of Darwinism and its refinement over the years. Still, Romanes is most famous for two major flaws in his work: his focus on anecdotal observations and entrenched anthropomorphism .

[ 14 ] Unsatisfied with the previous approach, E. L. Thorndike brought animal behavior into the laboratory for objective scrutiny.  Thorndike's careful observations of the escape of cats, dogs, and chicks from puzzle boxes led him to conclude that what appears to the naive human observer to be intelligent behavior may be strictly attributable to simple associations.  According to Thorndike, using Morgan's Canon, the inference of animal reason, insight, or consciousness is unnecessary and misleading.

[ 15 ] At about the same time, I. P. Pavlov began his seminal studies of conditioned reflexes in dogs. Pavlov quickly abandoned attempts to infer canine mental processes; such attempts, he said, led only to disagreement and confusion. He was, however, willing to propose unseen physiological processes that might explain his observations.

[ 16 ] The behavioristic half-century [ edit ] The work of Thorndike, Pavlov and a little later of the outspoken behaviorist John B. Watson [ 17 ] set the direction of much research on animal behavior for more than half a century.  During this time there was considerable progress in understanding simple associations; notably, around 1930 the differences between Thorndike's instrumental (or operant) conditioning and Pavlov's classical (or Pavlovian) conditioning were clarified, first by Miller and Kanorski, and then by B. F. Skinner .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Many experiments on conditioning followed; they generated some complex theories, [ 20 ] but they made little or no reference to intervening mental processes. Probably the most explicit dismissal of the idea that mental processes control behavior was the radical behaviorism of Skinner. This view seeks to explain behavior, including "private events" like mental images, solely by reference to the environmental contingencies impinging on the human or animal.

[ 21 ] Despite the predominantly behaviorist orientation of research before 1960, the rejection of mental processes in animals was not universal during those years. Influential exceptions included, for example, Wolfgang Köhler and his insightful chimpanzees [ 22 ] and Edward Tolman whose proposed cognitive map was a significant contribution to subsequent cognitive research in both humans and animals.

[ 23 ] The cognitive revolution [ edit ] Main article: Cognitive revolution Beginning around 1960, a "cognitive revolution" in research on humans [ 24 ] gradually spurred a similar transformation of research with animals. Inference to processes not directly observable became acceptable and then commonplace. An important proponent of this shift in thinking was Donald O. Hebb ,  who argued that "mind" is simply a name for processes in the head that control complex behavior, and that it is both necessary and possible to infer those processes from behavior.

[ 25 ] Animals came to be seen as  "goal seeking agents that acquire, store, retrieve, and internally process information at many levels of cognitive complexity".

[ 26 ] Methods [ edit ] The acceleration of research on animal cognition in the last 50 years or so has led to a rapid expansion in the variety of species studied and methods employed.  The remarkable behavior of large-brained animals such as primates and cetacea have claimed special attention, but all sorts of animals large and small (birds, fish, ants, bees, and others) have been brought into the laboratory or observed in carefully controlled field studies.  In the laboratory,  animals push levers, pull strings, dig for food, swim in water mazes, or respond to images on computer screens to get information for discrimination, attention , memory , and categorization experiments.

[ 27 ] Careful field studies explore memory for food caches, navigation by stars, [ 28 ] communication, tool use, identification of conspecifics , and many other matters. Studies often focus on the behavior of animals in their natural environments and discuss the putative function of the behavior for the propagation and survival of the species. These developments reflect an increased cross-fertilization from related fields such as ethology and behavioral ecology .  Contributions from behavioral neuroscience are beginning to clarify the physiological substrate of some inferred mental process.

Some researchers have made effective use of a Piagetian methodology, taking tasks which human children are known to master at different stages of development and investigating which of them can be performed by particular species. Others have been inspired by concerns for animal welfare and the management of domestic species; for example, Temple Grandin has harnessed her unique expertise in animal welfare and the ethical treatment of farm livestock to highlight underlying similarities between humans and other animals.

[ 29 ] From a methodological point of view, one of the main risks in this sort of work is anthropomorphism , the tendency to interpret an animal's behavior in terms of human feelings , thoughts, and motivations.

[ 1 ] Research questions [ edit ] The common chimpanzee can use tools. This individual is using a stick to get food.

Human and non-human animal cognition have much in common, and this is reflected in the research summarized below; most of the headings found here might also appear in an article on human cognition. Of course, research in the two also differs in important respects.  Notably, much research with humans either studies or involves language, and much research with animals is related directly or indirectly to behaviors important to survival in natural settings. Following are summaries of some of the major areas of research in animal cognition.

Perception [ edit ] Animals process information from eyes, ears, and other sensory organs to perceive the environment.  Perceptual processes have been studied in many species, with results that are often similar to those in humans. Equally interesting are those perceptual processes that differ from, or go beyond those found in humans, such as echolocation in bats and dolphins, motion detection by skin receptors in fish, and extraordinary visual acuity, motion sensitivity and ability to see ultraviolet light in some birds .

[ 30 ] Attention [ edit ] Much of what is happening in the world at any moment is irrelevant to current behavior.

Attention refers to mental processes that select relevant information, inhibit irrelevant information, and switch among these as the situation demands.

[ 31 ] Often the selective process is tuned before relevant information appears; such expectation makes for rapid selection of key stimuli when they become available. A large body of research has explored the way attention and expectation affect the behavior of non-human animals, and much of this work suggests that attention operates in birds, mammals and reptiles in much the same way that it does in humans.

[ 32 ] Selective Learning [ edit ] Animals trained to discriminate between two stimuli, say black versus white, can be said to attend to the "brightness dimension", but this says little about whether this dimension is selected in preference to others. More enlightenment comes from experiments that allow the animal to choose from several alternatives.  For example, several studies have shown that performance is better on, for example, a color discrimination (e.g. blue vs green) after the animal has learned another color discrimination (e.g. red vs orange) than it is after training on a different dimension such as an X shape versus an O shape. The reverse effect happens after training on forms. Thus, the earlier learning appears to affect which dimension, color or form, the animal will attend to.

[ 33 ] Other experiments have shown that after animals have learned to respond to one aspect of the environment responsiveness to other aspects is suppressed.  In "blocking", for example, an animal is conditioned to respond to one stimulus ("A") by pairing that stimulus with reward or punishment.  After the animal responds consistently to A, a second stimulus ("B") accompanies A on additional training trials.  Later tests with the B stimulus alone elicit little response, suggesting that learning about B has been blocked by prior learning about A.

[ 34 ] This result supports the hypothesis that stimuli are neglected if they fail to provide new information.  Thus, in the experiment just cited,  the animal failed to attend to B because B added no information to that supplied by A.  If true, this interpretation is an important insight into attentional processing, but this conclusion remains uncertain because blocking and several related phenomena can be explained by models of conditioning that do not invoke attention.

[ 35 ] Divided attention [ edit ] Attention is a limited resource and is not a none-or-all response:  the more attention devoted to one aspect of the environment, the less is available for others.

[ 36 ] A number of experiments have studied this in animals. In one experiment, a tone and a light are presented simultaneously to pigeons.  The pigeons gain a reward only by choosing the correct combination of the two stimuli (e.g. a high frequency tone together with a yellow light).  The birds perform well at this task, presumably by dividing attention between the two stimuli.  When only one of the stimuli varies and the other is presented at its rewarded value, discrimination improves on the variable stimulus but discrimination on the alternative stimulus worsens.

[ 37 ] These outcomes are consistent with the notion that attention is a limited resource that can be more or less focused among incoming stimuli.

Visual search and attentional priming [ edit ] As noted above, the function of attention is to select information that is of special use to the animal.  Visual search typically calls for this sort of selection, and search tasks have been used extensively in both humans and animals to determine the characteristics of attentional selection and the factors that control it.

Experimental research on visual search in animals was initially prompted by field observations published by Luc Tinbergen (1960).

[ 38 ] Tinbergen observed that birds are selective when foraging for insects. For example, he found that birds tended to catch the same type of insect repeatedly even though several types were available. Tinbergen suggested that this prey selection was caused by an attentional bias that improved detection of one type of insect while suppressing detection of others.  This "attentional priming" is commonly said to result from a pretrial activation of a mental representation of the attended object, which Tinbergen called a "searching image".

Tinbergen's field observations on priming have been supported by a number of experiments. For example, Pietrewicz and Kamil (1977, 1979) [ 39 ] [ 40 ] presented blue jays with pictures of tree trunks upon which rested either a moth of species A, a moth of species B, or no moth at all.  The birds were rewarded for pecks at a picture showing a moth. Crucially, the probability with which a particular species of moth was detected was higher after repeated trials with that species  (e.g. A, A, A,...) than it was after a mixture of trials (e.g. A, B, B, A, B, A, A...).  These results suggest again that sequential encounters with an object can establish an attentional predisposition to see the object.

Another way to produce attentional priming in search is to provide an advance signal that is associated with the target.  For example, if a person hears a song sparrow he or she may be predisposed to detect a song sparrow in a shrub, or among other birds.  A number of experiments have reproduced this effect in animal subjects.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Still other experiments have explored nature of stimulus factors that affect the speed and accuracy of visual search.  For example, the time taken to find a single target increases as the number of items in the visual field increases.  This rise in reaction time is steep if the distracters are similar to the target, less steep if they are dissimilar, and may not occur if the distracters are very different from the target in form or color.

[ 43 ] Concepts and categories [ edit ] Fundamental but difficult to define, the concept of "concept" was discussed for hundreds of years by philosophers before it became a focus of psychological study.  Concepts enable humans and animals to organize the world into functional groups; the groups may be composed of perceptually similar objects or events, diverse things that have a common function, relationships such as same versus different,  or relations among relations such as analogies.

[ 44 ] Extensive discussions on these matters together with many references may be found in Shettleworth (2010) [ 1 ] Wasserman and Zentall (2006) [ 27 ] and in Zentall et al.

(2008).  The latter is freely available online.

[ 45 ] Methods [ edit ] Most work on animal concepts has been done with visual stimuli, which can easily be constructed and presented in great variety, but auditory and other stimuli have been used as well.

[ 46 ] Pigeons have been widely used, for they have excellent vision and are readily conditioned to respond to visual targets; other birds and a number of other animals have been studied as well.

[ 1 ] In a typical experiment, a bird or other animal confronts a computer monitor on which a large number of pictures appear one by one, and the subject gets a reward for pecking or touching a picture of a category item and no reward for non-category items. Alternatively, a subject may be offered a choice between two or more pictures.  Many experiments end with the presentation of items never seen before; successful sorting of these items shows that the animal has not simply learned many specific stimulus-response associations. A related method, sometimes used to study relational concepts,  is matching-to-sample. In this task an animal sees one stimulus and then chooses between two or more alternatives, one of which is the same as the first;  the animal is then rewarded for choosing the matching stimulus.

[ 1 ] [ 27 ] [ 45 ] Perceptual categories [ edit ] Perceptual categorization is said to occur when a person or animal responds in a similar way to a range of stimuli that share common features.  For example, a squirrel climbs a tree when it sees Rex, Shep, or Trixie, which suggests that it categorizes all three as something to avoid.  This sorting of instances into groups is crucial to survival.  Among other things, an animal must categorize if it is to apply learning about one object (e.g. Rex bit me) to new instances of that category (dogs may bite).

[ 1 ] [ 27 ] [ 45 ] Natural categories [ edit ] Many animals readily classify objects by perceived differences in form or color.  For example, bees or pigeons quickly learn to choose any red object and reject any green object if red leads to reward and green does not.  Seemingly much more difficult is an animal's ability to categorize natural objects that vary a great deal in color and form even while belonging to the same group. In a classic study, Richard J. Herrnstein trained pigeons to respond to the presence or absence of human beings in photographs.

[ 47 ] The birds readily learned to peck photos that contained partial or full views of humans and to avoid pecking photos with no human, despite great differences in the form, size, and color of both the humans displayed and in the non-human pictures.  In follow-up studies, pigeons categorized other natural objects (e.g. trees) and after training they were able without reward to sort photos they had not seen before .

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] Similar work has been done with natural auditory categories, for example, bird songs.

[ 50 ] Honeybees ( Apis mellifera ) are able to form concepts of "up" and "down".

[ 51 ] Functional or associative categories [ edit ] Perceptually unrelated stimuli may come to be responded to as members of a class if they have a common use or lead to common consequences. An oft-cited study by Vaughan (1988) provides an example.

[ 52 ] Vaughan divided a large set of unrelated pictures into two arbitrary sets, A and B.  Pigeons got food for pecking at pictures in set A but not for pecks at pictures in set B.  After they had learned this task fairly well, the outcome was reversed: items in set B led to food and items in set A did not. Then the outcome was reversed again, and then again,  and so on. Vaughan found that after 20 or more reversals,  associating a reward with a few pictures in one set caused the birds to respond to the other pictures in that set without further reward as if they were thinking "if these pictures in set A bring food, the others in set A must also bring food."  That is, the birds now categorized the pictures in each set as functionally equivalent. Several other procedures have yielded similar results.

[ 1 ] [ 45 ] Relational or abstract categories [ edit ] When tested in a simple stimulus matching-to-sample task (described above) many animals readily learn specific item combinations, such as "touch red if the sample is red, touch green if the sample is green."  But this does not demonstrate that they distinguish between "same" and "different" as general concepts.  Better evidence is provided if, after training, an animal successfully makes a choice that matches a novel sample that it has never seen before.  Monkeys and chimpanzees do learn to do this, as do pigeons if they are given a great deal of practice with many different stimuli. However,  because the sample is presented first, successful matching might mean that the animal is simply choosing the most recently seen "familiar" item rather than the conceptually "same" item. A number of studies have attempted to distinguish these possibilities, with mixed results.

[ 1 ] [ 45 ] Rule learning [ edit ] The use of rules has sometimes been considered an ability restricted to humans, but a number of experiments have shown evidence of simple rule learning in primates [ 53 ] and also in other animals.  Much of the evidence has come from studies of sequence learning in which the "rule" consists of the order in which a series of events occurs.  Rule use is shown if the animal learns to discriminate different orders of events and transfers this discrimination to new events arranged in the same order. For example,  Murphy et al.

(2008) [ 54 ] trained rats to discriminate between visual sequences.  For one group ABA and BAB were rewarded, where A="bright light" and B="dim light".  Other stimulus triplets were not rewarded.  The rats learned the visual sequence, although both bright and dim lights were equally associated with reward.  More importantly, in a second experiment with auditory stimuli, rats responded correctly to sequences of novel stimuli that were arranged in the same order as those previously learned.  Similar sequence learning has been demonstrated in birds and other animals as well.

[ 55 ] Memory [ edit ] The categories that have been developed to analyze human memory ( short term memory , long term memory , working memory ) have been applied to the study of animal memory, and some of the phenomena characteristic of human short term memory (e.g. the serial position effect ) have been detected in animals, particularly monkeys .

[ 56 ] However most progress has been made in the analysis of spatial memory ; some of this work has sought to clarify the physiological basis of spatial memory and the role of the hippocampus ; other work has explored the spatial memory of scatter-hoarder animals such as Clark's nutcracker , certain jays , tits and certain squirrels , whose ecological niches require them to remember the locations of thousands of caches, [ 1 ] [ 57 ] often following radical changes in the environment.

Memory has been widely investigated in foraging honeybees, Apis mellifera , which use both transient short-term working memory that is non-feeder specific and a feeder specific
long-term reference memory.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] Memory induced in a free-flying honeybee by a single learning trial lasts for days and, by three learning trials, for a lifetime.

[ 61 ] Bombus terrestris audax workers vary in their effort investment towards memorising flower locations, with smaller workers less able to be selective and thus less interested in which flowers are richer sugar sources.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] Meanwhile, bigger B. t. audax workers have more carrying capacity and thus more reason to memorise that information, and so they do.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] Slugs, Limax flavus , have a short-term memory of approximately 1 min and long-term memory of 1 month.

[ 64 ] Methods [ edit ] As in humans, research with animals distinguishes between "working" or "short-term" memory from "reference" or long-term memory.  Tests of working memory evaluate memory for events that happened in the recent past, usually within the last few seconds or minutes.  Tests of reference memory evaluate memory for regularities such as "pressing a lever brings food" or "children give me peanuts".

Habituation [ edit ] Main article: Habituation This is one of the simplest tests for memory spanning a short time interval. The test compares an animal's response to a stimulus or event on one occasion to its response on a previous occasion.  If the second response differs consistently from the first, the animal must have remembered something about the first, unless some other factor such as motivation, sensory sensitivity, or the test stimulus has changed.

Delayed response [ edit ] Delayed response tasks are often used to study short-term memory in animals.  Introduced by Hunter (1913), a typical delayed response task presents an animal with a stimulus such as colored light, and after a short time interval the animal chooses among alternatives that match the stimulus, or are related to the stimulus in some other way. In Hunter's studies, for example, a light appeared briefly in one of three goal boxes and then later the animal chose among the boxes, finding food behind the one that had been lighted.

[ 65 ] Most research has been done with some variation of the "delayed matching-to-sample" task. For example, in the initial study with this task, a pigeon was presented with a flickering or steady light. Then, a few seconds later, two pecking keys were illuminated, one with a steady light and one with a flickering light. The bird got food if it pecked the key that matched the original stimulus.

[ 66 ] A commonly used variation of the matching-to-sample task requires the animal to use the initial stimulus to control a later choice between different stimuli. For example, if the initial stimulus is a black circle, the animal learns to choose "red" after the delay; if it is a black square, the correct choice is "green".  Ingenious variations of this method have been used to explore many aspects of memory, including forgetting due to interference and memory for multiple items.

[ 1 ] Radial arm maze [ edit ] Main article: Radial arm maze The radial arm maze is used to test memory for spatial location and to determine the mental processes by which location is determined.  In a radial maze test, an animal is placed on a small platform from which paths lead in various directions to goal boxes; the animal finds food in one or more goal boxes. Having found food in a box, the animal must return to the central platform.  The maze may be used to test both reference and working memory.  Suppose, for example, that over a number of sessions the same 4 arms of an 8-arm maze always lead to food. If in a later test session the animal goes to a box that has never been baited, this indicates a failure of reference memory.  On the other hand, if the animal goes to a box that it has already emptied during the same test session, this indicates a failure of working memory.  Various confounding factors, such as odor cues , are carefully controlled in such experiments.

[ 67 ] Water maze [ edit ] Main article: Morris water navigation task The water maze is used to test an animal's memory for spatial location and to discover how an animal is able to determine locations. Typically the maze is a circular tank filled with water that has been made milky so that it is opaque. Located somewhere in the maze is a small platform placed just below the surface of the water. When placed in the tank, the animal swims around until it finds and climbs up on the platform. With practice, the animal finds the platform more and more quickly. Reference memory is assessed by removing the platform and observing the relative amount of time the animal spends swimming in the area where the platform had been located.  Visual and other cues in and around the tank may be varied to assess the animal's reliance on landmarks and the geometric relations among them.

[ 68 ] Novel object recognition test [ edit ] The novel object recognition (NOR) test is an animal behavior test that is primarily used to assess memory alterations in rodents. It is a simple behavioral test that is based on a rodents innate exploratory behavior. The test is divided into three phases: habituation, training/adaptation and test phase. During the habituation phase the animal is placed in an empty test arena. This is followed by the adaptation phase, where the animal is placed in the arena with two identical objects. In the third phase, the test phase, the animal is placed in the arena with one of the familiar objects from the previous phase and with one novel object. Based on the rodents innate curiosity, the animals that remember the familiar object will spend more time on investigating the novel object.

[ 69 ] Spatial cognition [ edit ] Whether an animal ranges over a territory measured in square kilometers or square meters, its survival typically depends on its ability to do such things as find a food source and then return to its nest. Sometimes such a task can be performed rather simply, for example by following a chemical trail. Typically, however, the animal must somehow acquire and use information about locations, directions, and distances. The following paragraphs outline some of the ways that animals do this.

[ 1 ] [ 70 ] Beacons Animals often learn what their nest or other goal looks like, and if it is within sight they may simply move toward it; it is said to serve as a "beacon".

Landmarks When an animal is unable to see its goal, it may learn the appearance of nearby objects and use these landmarks as guides.  Researchers working with birds and bees have demonstrated this by moving prominent objects in the vicinity of nest sites, causing returning foragers to hunt for their nest in a new location.

[ 1 ] Dead reckoning , also known as "path integration", is the process of computing one's position by starting from a known location and keeping track of the distances and directions subsequently traveled. Classic experiments have shown that the desert ant keeps track of its position in this way as it wanders for many meters searching for food. Though it travels in a randomly twisted path, it heads straight home when it finds food.  However, if the ant is picked up and released some meters to the east, for example, it heads for a location displaced by the same amount to the east of its home nest.

Cognitive maps Some animals appear to construct a cognitive map of their surroundings, meaning that they acquire and use information that enables them to compute how far and in what direction to go to get from one location to another. Such a map-like representation is thought to be used, for example, when an animal goes directly from one food source to another even though its previous experience has involved only travel between each source and home.

[ 1 ] [ 71 ] Research in this area [ 70 ] has also explored such topics as the use of geometric properties of the environment by rats and pigeons, and the ability of rats to represent a spatial pattern in either radial arm mazes or water mazes . Spatial cognition is used in visual search when an animal or human searches their environment for specific objects to focus on among other objects in the environment.

[ 72 ] Detour behaviour Some animals appear to have an advanced understanding of their spatial environment and will not take the most direct route if this confers an advantage to them.  Some jumping spiders take an indirect route to prey rather than the most direct route, thereby indicating flexibility in behaviour and route planning, and possibly insight learning.

[ 73 ] Long-distance navigation; homing [ edit ] Main article: Animal navigation Many animals travel hundreds or thousands of miles in seasonal migrations or returns to breeding grounds. They may be guided by the Sun, the stars, the polarization of light, magnetic cues, olfactory cues, winds, or a combination of these.

[ 74 ] It has been hypothesized that animals such as apes and wolves are good at spatial cognition because this skill is necessary for survival. Some researchers argue that this ability may have diminished somewhat in dogs because humans have provided necessities such as food and shelter during some 15,000 years of domestication.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] [ 77 ] Timing [ edit ] Further information: Time perception Time of day: circadian rhythms [ edit ] Main article: Circadian rhythms The behavior of most animals is synchronized with the earth's daily light-dark cycle.  Thus, many animals are active during the day, others are active at night, still others near dawn and dusk. Though one might think that these "circadian rhythms" are controlled simply by the presence or absence of light, nearly every animal that has been studied has been shown to have a "biological clock" that yields cycles of activity even when the animal is in constant illumination or darkness.

[ 1 ] Circadian rhythms are so automatic and fundamental to living things – they occur even in plants [ 78 ] – that they are usually discussed separately from cognitive processes, and the reader is referred to the main article ( Circadian rhythms ) for further information.

[ 79 ] Interval timing [ edit ] Survival often depends on an animal's ability to time intervals. For example, rufous hummingbirds feed on the nectar of flowers, and they often return to the same flower, but only after the flower has had enough time to replenish its supply of nectar. In one experiment hummingbirds fed on artificial flowers that quickly emptied of nectar but were refilled at some fixed time (e.g. twenty minutes) later. The birds learned to come back to the flowers at about the right time, learning the refill rates of up to eight separate flowers and remembering how long ago they had visited each one.

[ 80 ] The details of interval timing have been studied in a number of species.  One of the most common methods is the "peak procedure". In a typical experiment, a rat in an operant chamber presses a lever for food.  A light comes on, a lever-press brings a food pellet at a fixed later time, say 10 seconds, and then the light goes off. Timing is measured during occasional test trials on which no food is presented and the light stays on.  On these test trials, the rat presses the lever more and more until about 10 sec and then, when no food comes, gradually stops pressing.  The time at which the rat presses most on these test trials is taken to be its estimate of the payoff time.

Experiments using the peak procedure and other methods have shown that animals can time short intervals quite exactly, can time more than one event at once, and can integrate time with spatial and other cues. Such tests have also been used for quantitative tests of theories of animal timing, such as Gibbon's Scalar Expectancy Theory ("SET"), [ 81 ] Killeen's Behavioral Theory of Timing, [ 82 ] and Machado's Learning to Time model.

[ 83 ] No one theory has yet gained unanimous agreement.

[ 1 ] Tool and weapon use [ edit ] Main article: Tool use by animals Although tool use was long assumed to be a uniquely human trait, there is now much evidence that many animals use tools, including mammals, birds, fish, cephalopods and insects. Discussions of tool use often involve a debate about what constitutes a "tool", and they often consider the relation of tool use to the animal's intelligence and brain size.

Mammals [ edit ] Series of photographs showing a bonobo fishing for termites A bonobo inserting a stick into a termite mound The bonobo starts "fishing" for the termites.

The bonobo withdraws the stick and begins eating the termites.

The bonobo eats the termites extracted with the tool.

Tool use has been reported many times in both wild and captive primates , particularly the great apes. The use of tools by primates is varied and includes hunting (mammals, invertebrates, fish), collecting honey, processing food (nuts, fruits, vegetables and seeds), collecting water, weapons and shelter.  Research in 2007 shows that chimpanzees in the Fongoli savannah sharpen sticks to use as spears when hunting, considered the first evidence of systematic use of weapons in a species other than humans.

[ 84 ] Other mammals that spontaneously use tools in the wild or in captivity include elephants , bears , cetaceans , sea otters and mongooses .

Birds [ edit ] Main article: Bird intelligence Several species of birds have been observed to use tools in the wild, including warblers, parrots, Egyptian vultures, brown-headed nuthatches, gulls and owls.  Some species, such as the woodpecker finch of the Galapagos Islands , use particular tools as an essential part of their foraging behavior. However, these behaviors are often quite inflexible and cannot be applied effectively in new situations. A great many species of birds build nests with a wide range of complexities, but although nest-building behaviour fulfills the criteria of some definitions of "tool-use", this is not the case with other definitions.

Several species of corvids have been trained to use tools in controlled experiments. One species examined extensively under laboratory conditions is the New Caledonian crow . One individual called "Betty" spontaneously made a wire tool to solve a novel problem. She was being tested to see whether she would select a wire hook rather than a straight wire to pull a little bucket of meat out of a well. Betty tried poking the straight wire at the meat. After a series of failures with this direct approach, she withdrew the wire and began directing it at the bottom of the well, which was secured to its base with duct tape. The wire soon became stuck, whereupon Betty pulled it sideways, bending it and unsticking it. She then inserted the hook into the well and extracted the meat. In all but one of 10 subsequent trials with only straight wire provided, she also made and used a hook in the same manner, but not before trying the straight wire first.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] Another bird that is highly studied for its intelligence is the African Gray Parrot. American animal behaviorist and psychologist Irene Pepperberg vindicated that African Grays possess cognitive abilities. Pepperberg used a bird named "Alex" in her trials and was able to prove that parrots could associate sound and meaning, demolishing long-held theories that birds were only capable of mimicking human voices. Studies by other researchers have determined that African Grays can use deductive reasoning to correctly choose between pairs of boxes containing food and boxes that are empty.

[ 87 ] Until Pepperberg began this research in the 1970s, few scientists had studied intelligence in parrots, and few do today. Most inquiries have instead focused on monkeys, chimpanzees, gorillas, and dolphins, all of which are much more difficult to raise, feed, and handle.

[ 88 ] By the late 1980s, Alex had learned the names of more than 50 different objects, five shapes, and seven colors. He'd also learned what "same" and "different" mean—a step crucial in human intellectual development [ 89 ] Fish [ edit ] Main article: Fish intelligence Several species of wrasses have been observed using rocks as anvils to crack bivalve (scallops, urchins and clams) shells. This behavior was first filmed [ 90 ] in an orange-dotted tuskfish ( Choerodon anchorago ) in 2009 by Giacomo Bernardi. The fish fans sand to unearth the bivalve, takes it into its mouth, swims several meters to a rock, which it then uses as an anvil by smashing the mollusc apart with sideward thrashes of the head.  This behaviour has also been recorded in a blackspot tuskfish ( Choerodon schoenleinii ) on Australia's Great Barrier Reef, yellowhead wrasse ( Halichoeres garnoti ) in Florida and a six-bar wrasse ( Thalassoma hardwicke ) in an aquarium setting.  These species are at opposite ends of the phylogenetic tree in this family , so this behaviour may be a deep-seated trait in all wrasses.

[ 91 ] Invertebrates [ edit ] Main article: Cephalopod intelligence An octopus traveling with shells collected for protection. Despite evolving independently from humans for over 600 million years, octopuses  demonstrate problem-solving abilities, adaptive learning, and likely sentience .

[ 92 ] Cephalopods are capable of complex tasks, thus earning them the reputation of being among the smartest of invertebrates. For example, octopuses can open jars to get the contents inside and have remarkable ability to learn new skills from the moment they are born.

[ 93 ] Some cephalopods are known to use coconut shells for protection or camouflage .

[ 94 ] Cephalopod cognitive evolution is hypothesized to have been shaped primarily by predatory and foraging pressures, but a challenging mating context may also have played a role.

[ 93 ] Ants of the species Conomyrma bicolor pick up stones and other small objects with their mandibles and drop them down the vertical entrances of rival colonies, allowing workers to forage for food without competition.

[ 95 ] Reasoning and problem solving [ edit ] It is clear that animals of quite a range of species are capable of solving problems that appear to require abstract reasoning; [ 96 ] Wolfgang Köhler's (1917) work with chimpanzees is a famous early example. He observed that chimpanzees did not use trial and error to solve problems such as retrieving bananas hung out of reach. Instead, they behaved in a manner that was "unwaveringly purposeful", spontaneously placing boxes so that they could climb to reach the fruit.

[ 22 ] Modern research has identified similar behavior in animals usually thought of as much less intelligent, if appropriate pre-training is given.

[ 97 ] Causal reasoning has also been observed in rooks and New Caledonian crows.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] It has been shown that Barbados bullfinches ( Loxigilla barbadensis ) from urbanized areas are better at innovative problem-solving tasks than bullfinches from rural environments, but that they did not differ in colour discrimination learning.

[ 100 ] Cognitive bias [ edit ] Main article: Cognitive bias Is the glass half empty or half full?

A cognitive bias refers to a systematic pattern of deviation from norm or rationality in judgment, whereby inferences about other individuals or situations may be drawn in an illogical fashion.

Cognitive bias is sometimes illustrated by using answers to the question " Is the glass half empty or half full?

". Choosing "half empty" is supposed to indicate pessimism whereas choosing "half full" indicates optimism. To test this in animals, an individual is trained to anticipate that stimulus A, e.g. a 100 Hz tone, precedes a positive event, e.g. highly desired food is delivered when a lever is pressed by the animal.  The same individual is trained to anticipate that stimulus B, e.g. a 900 Hz tone, precedes a negative event, e.g. bland food is delivered when the animal presses a lever. The animal is then tested by being given an intermediate stimulus C, e.g. a 500 Hz tone, and observing whether the animal presses the lever associated with the positive or negative reward. This has been suggested to indicate whether the animal is in a positive or negative mood.

[ 101 ] In a study that used this approach, rats that were playfully tickled responded differently than rats that were simply handled. The rats that had been tickled were more optimistic than the handled rats.

[ 102 ] The authors suggested that they had demonstrated "...for the first time a link between the directly measured positive affective state and decision making under uncertainty in an animal model".

There is some evidence for cognitive bias in a number of species, including rats, dogs, rhesus macaques, sheep, chicks, starlings and honeybees.

[ 103 ] Language [ edit ] Main articles: Animal language and Human-animal communication Further information: Talking animal The modeling of human language in animals is known as animal language research.  In addition to the ape-language experiments mentioned above, there have also been more or less successful attempts to teach language or language-like behavior to some non-primate species, including parrots and great spotted woodpeckers . Arguing from his own results with the animal Nim Chimpsky and his analysis of others results, Herbert Terrace criticized the idea that chimps can produce new sentences.

[ 104 ] Shortly thereafter Louis Herman published research on artificial language comprehension in the bottlenose dolphin.

[ 105 ] Though this sort of research has been controversial, especially among cognitive linguists , many researchers agree that many animals can understand the meaning of individual words, and that some may understand simple sentences and syntactic variations. Elephants can remember tone, melody, and recognise more than 20 words.

[ 106 ] Nevertheless, there is little evidence that any animal can produce new strings of symbols that correspond to new sentences.

[ 1 ] Insight [ edit ] See also: Reason Wolfgang Köhler is usually credited with introducing the concept of insight into experimental psychology.

[ 86 ] Working with chimpanzees, Köhler came to dispute Edward Thorndike 's theory that animals must solve problems gradually, by trial and error. He said that Thorndike's animals could only use trial and error because the situation precluded other forms of problem solving. He provided chimps with a relatively unstructured situation, and he observed sudden "ah-ha!" insightful changes of behavior, as, for example, when a chimp suddenly moved a box into position so that it could retrieve a banana.

[ 107 ] More recently, Asian elephants ( Elephas maximus ) were shown to exhibit similar insightful problem solving. A male was observed moving a box to a position where it could be stood upon to reach food that had been deliberately hung out of reach.

[ 108 ] Numeracy [ edit ] Main article: Number sense in animals A variety of studies indicates that animals are able to use and communicate quantitative information, and that some can count in a rudimentary way.  Some examples of this research follow.

In one study, rhesus monkeys viewed visual displays containing, for example, 1, 2, 3, or 4 items of different sorts. They were trained to respond to them in several ways involving numerical ordering, for example touching "1" first, "2" second and so on.  When tested with displays containing items they had never seen before, they continued to respond to them in order. The authors conclude that monkeys can represent the numerosities 1 to 9 at least on an ordinal scale.

[ 109 ] Ants are able to use quantitative values and transmit this information.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] For instance, ants of several species are able to estimate quite precisely numbers of encounters with members of other colonies on their feeding territories.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] Moreover, ants of some species can count up to 20 and add and subtract numbers within 5.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] This has been demonstrated using carefully crafted experiments based on measuring the time it takes for a scouting ant to pass the information to its team about the branch of an experimental maze on which food can be found.

Numeracy has been described in the yellow mealworm beetle ( Tenebrio molitor ) [ 116 ] and the honeybee.

[ 117 ] Western lowland gorillas given the choice between two food trays demonstrated the ability to choose the tray with more food items at a rate higher than chance after training.

[ 118 ] In a similar task, chimpanzees chose the option with the larger amount of food.

[ 119 ] Salamanders given a choice between two displays with differing amounts of fruit flies, used as a food reward, reliably choose the display with more flies, as shown in a particular experiment.

[ 120 ] Other experiments have been conducted that show animals' abilities to differentiate between non-food quantities.

American black bears demonstrated quantity differentiation abilities in a task with a computer screen.  The bears were trained to touch a computer monitor with a paw or nose to choose a quantity of dots in one of two boxes on the screen.  Each bear was trained with reinforcement to pick a larger or smaller amount.  During training, the bears were rewarded with food for a correct response.  All bears performed better than what random error predicted on the trials with static, non-moving dots, indicating that they could differentiate between the two quantities.  The bears choosing correctly in congruent (number of dots coincided with area of the dots) and incongruent (number of dots did not coincide with area of the dots) trials suggests that they were indeed choosing between quantities that appeared on the screen, not just a larger or smaller retinal image , which would indicate they are only judging size.

[ 121 ] Bottlenose dolphins have shown the ability to choose an array with fewer dots compared to one with more dots.  Experimenters set up two boards showing various numbers of dots in a poolside setup.  The dolphins were initially trained to choose the board with the fewer number of dots. This was done by rewarding the dolphin when it chose the board with the fewer number of dots.  In the experimental trials, two boards were set up, and the dolphin would emerge from the water and point to one board.  The dolphins chose the arrays with fewer dots at a rate much larger than chance, indicating they can differentiate between quantities.

[ 122 ] A particular grey parrot , after training, has shown the ability to differentiate between the numbers zero through six using vocalizations .  After number and vocalization training, this was done by asking the parrot how many objects there were in a display.  The parrot was able to identify the correct amount at a rate higher than chance.

[ 123 ] Angelfish , when put in an unfamiliar environment will group together with conspecifics, an action named shoaling .  Given the choice between two groups of differing size, the angelfish will choose the larger of the two groups.  This can be seen with a discrimination ratio of 2:1 or greater, such that, as long as one group has at least twice the fish as another group, it will join the larger one.

[ 124 ] Monitor lizards have been shown to be capable of numeracy, and some species can distinguish among numbers up to six.

[ 125 ] Sapience [ edit ] Main article: g factor in non-humans As the cognitive ability and intelligence in non-human animals cannot be measured with verbal scales, it has been measured using a variety of methods that involve such things as habit reversal, social learning , and responses to novelty .

Principal component analysis and factor analytic studies have shown that a single factor of intelligence is responsible for 47% of the individual variance in cognitive ability measures in primates [ 126 ] and between 55% and 60% of the variance in mice .

[ 127 ] [ 128 ] These values are similar to the accepted variance in IQ explained by a similar single factor known as the general factor of intelligence in humans (40–50%).

[ 129 ] However, results from a recent meta-analysis suggest that the average correlation between performance scores on various cognitive tasks is only 0.18.

[ 130 ] Results from this study suggest that current evidence for general intelligence is weak in non-human animals.

[ 130 ] The general factor of intelligence, or g factor , is a psychometric construct that summarizes the correlations observed between an individual's scores on various measures of cognitive abilities . It has been suggested that g is related to evolutionary life histories and the evolution of intelligence [ 131 ] as well as to social learning and cultural intelligence .

[ 132 ] [ 133 ] Non-human models of g have been used in genetic [ 134 ] and neurological [ 135 ] research on intelligence to help understand the mechanisms behind variation in g .

Theory of mind [ edit ] Main article: Theory of mind in animals Theory of mind is the ability to attribute mental states, e.g.

intents , desires , pretending , knowledge , to oneself and others and to understand that others have desires, intentions, and perspectives that are different from one's own.

[ 136 ] Some research with ravens provides an example of evidence for theory of mind in a non-human species. Ravens are members of the family Corvidae , which is widely regarded as having high cognitive abilities. These birds have been observed to hide their food when dominant ravens are visible and audible at the same time. Based on this observation, ravens were tested for their understanding of "seeing" as a mental state.  In a first step, the birds protected their cache when dominants were visible but not when they could only be heard from an adjacent room. In the next step, they had access to a small peephole which allowed them to see into the adjacent room.  With the peephole open, the ravens guarded their caches against discovery when they could hear dominants in the adjacent room, even when the dominant's sounds were playbacks of recordings.

[ 137 ] Consciousness [ edit ] Main article: Animal consciousness Mirror test with a baboon The sense in which animals can be said to have self- consciousness or a self-concept has been hotly debated. The best known research technique in this area is the mirror test devised by Gordon G. Gallup , in which an animal's skin is marked in some way while it is asleep or sedated, and it is then allowed to see its reflection in a mirror; if the animal spontaneously directs grooming behavior towards the mark, that is taken as an indication that it is aware of itself.

[ 138 ] [ 139 ] Self-awareness, by this criterion, has been reported for chimpanzees [ 140 ] [ 141 ] and also for other great apes, [ 142 ] the European magpie , [ 143 ] some cetaceans [ 144 ] [ 145 ] [ 146 ] and an Asian elephant , [ 147 ] but not for monkeys. The mirror test has been criticized by researchers because it is entirely focused on vision, the primary sense in humans, while other species rely more heavily on other senses such as the sense of smell in dogs.

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] [ 150 ] It has been suggested that metacognition in some animals provides some evidence for cognitive self-awareness.

[ 151 ] The great apes, dolphins, and rhesus monkeys have demonstrated the ability to monitor their own mental states and use an "I don't know" response to avoid answering difficult questions. Unlike the mirror test, which reveals awareness of the condition of one's own body, this uncertainty monitoring is thought to reveal awareness of one's internal mental state. A 2007 study has provided some evidence for metacognition in rats , [ 152 ] [ 153 ] although this interpretation has been questioned.

[ 154 ] [ 155 ] These species might also be aware of the strength of their memories.

Some researchers propose that animal calls and other vocal behaviors provide evidence of consciousness. This idea arose from research on children's crib talk by Weir (1962) and in investigations of early speech in children by Greenfield and others (1976). Some such research has been done with a macaw (see Arielle ).

In July, 2012 during the "Consciousness in Human and Nonhuman Animals" conference in Cambridge a group of scientists announced and signed a declaration with the following conclusions: Convergent evidence indicates that non-human animals have the neuroanatomical, neurochemical, and neurophysiological substrates of conscious states along with the capacity to exhibit intentional behaviors. Consequently, the weight of evidence indicates that humans are not unique in possessing the neurological substrates that generate consciousness. Non-human animals, including all mammals and birds, and many other creatures, including octopuses, also possess these neurological substrates.

[ 156 ] Biological constraints [ edit ] Instinctive drift can influence the interpretation of cognitive research.  Instinctive drift is the tendency of an animal to revert to instinctive behaviors that can interfere with learned responses. The concept originated with Keller and Marian Breland when they taught a raccoon to put coins into a box. The raccoon drifted to its instinctive behavior of rubbing the coins with its paws, as it would do when foraging for food.

[ 157 ] Animal ability to process and respond to stimuli is correlated with brain size. Small-brain animals tend to show simple behaviors that are less dependent on learning than those of large-brained animals. Vertebrates, particularly mammals, have larger brains and complex behavior that changes with experience. A formula called the encephalization quotient (EQ) expresses a relationship between brain and body size; it was developed by H.J. Jerison in the late 1960s.

[ 158 ] When the encephalization quotient is plotted as a curve, an animal with an EQ above the curve is expected to show more cognitive ability than the average animal of its size, whereas an animal with an EQ below the curve is expected to have less. Various formulas been suggested, but the equation Ew(brain) = 0.12w(body) 2/3 has been found to fit data from a sample of mammals.

[ 159 ] The formula is suggestive at best, and should only be applied to non-mammals with extreme caution. For some of the other vertebrate classes, the power of 3/4 rather than 2/3 is sometimes used, and for many groups of invertebrates , the formula may not give meaningful results.

Experimental evidence against animal cognition [ edit ] Several experiments cannot be readily reconciled with the belief that some animal species are intelligent, insightful, or possess a theory of mind.

Jean-Henri Fabre [ 160 ] (1823–1915), setting the stage for all subsequent experiments of this kind, argued that insects "obey their compelling instinct, without realizing what they do". For instance, to understand that she can grab her paralyzed prey by a leg instead of an antenna is utterly beyond the powers of a sand wasp. "Her actions are like a series of echoes each awakening the next in a settled order, which allows none to sound until the previous one has sounded." Fabre's numerous experiments led him, in turn, to the view that scientists often try to "exalt animals" instead of objectively studying them.

C. Lloyd Morgan 's [ 161 ] (1852–1936) observations suggested to him that prima facie intelligent behavior in animals is often the result of either instincts or trial and error. For instance, most visitors watching Morgan's dog smoothly lifting a latch with the back of its head (and thereby opening a garden gate and escaping) were convinced that the dog's actions involved thinking. Morgan, however, carefully observed the dog's prior, random, purposeless actions and argued that they involved "continued trial and failure, until a happy effect is reached", rather than "methodical planning".

E. L. Thorndike [ 15 ] (1874–1949) placed hungry cats and dogs in enclosures "from which they could escape by some simple act, such as pulling at a loop of cord". Their behavior suggested to him that they did not "possess the power of rationality". Most books about animal behavior, Thorndike wrote, "do not give us a psychology, but rather a eulogy of animals".

Although Wolfgang Köhler's [ 162 ] experiments are often cited as providing support for the animal cognition hypothesis, his book is replete with counterexamples. For instance, he placed chimpanzees in a situation where they could only get bananas by removing a box.  The chimpanzee, Köhler observed, "has special difficulty in solving such problems; he often draws into a situation the strangest and most distant tools, and adopts the most peculiar methods, rather than remove a simple obstacle which could be displaced with perfect ease".

Daniel J. Povinelli and Timothy Eddy [ 163 ] of the University of Louisiana showed that young chimpanzees, when given a choice between two food providers, were just as likely to beg food from a person who could see the begging gesture as from a person who could not, thereby raising the possibility that young chimpanzees do not understand that people see.

Moty Nissani [ 164 ] of Wayne State University trained Burmese logging elephants to lift a lid in order to retrieve food from a bucket. The lid was then placed on the ground alongside the bucket (where it no longer obstructed access to the food) while the treat was simultaneously placed inside the bucket. All elephants continued to toss the lid before retrieving the reward, thus suggesting that elephants do not grasp simple causal relationships.

Cognitive faculty by species [ edit ] A traditionally common image is the scala naturae , the ladder of nature on which animals of different species occupy successively higher rungs, with humans typically at the top.

[ 165 ] [ 166 ] However, there is some disagreement with the use of such a hierarchy, with some critics saying it may be necessary to understand specific cognitive capacities as adaptations to differing ecological niches.

[ 167 ] Some biologists argue that humans are not, in fact, the smartest animal, and that no animal can be characterized as the smartest, given that some animals have superior cognitive skills in certain areas.

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] This contrasts with evolutionary psychologists, such as John Tooby , who assess, based on the large list of related unique characteristics that humans do possess, that humans evolved to fill a unique "cognitive niche" and can fairly be characterized as the smartest animal.

[ 170 ] Whether fairly or not, the performance of animals is often compared to that of humans on cognitive tasks. Our closest biological relatives, the great apes , tend to perform most like humans. Among the birds, corvids and parrots have typically been found to perform well on human-like tasks.

[ 171 ] Some octopodes have also been shown to exhibit a number of higher-level skills, such as tool use, [ 94 ] but the amount of research on cephalopod intelligence is still limited.

[ 172 ] Baboons have been shown to be capable of recognizing words.

[ 173 ] [ 174 ] [ 175 ] The average bird or mammal, both usually endotherms , have average brain-to-body ratios ten times larger than a typical ectotherm vertebrate. This has contributed to a common perception amongst researchers that mammals and birds share similar "advanced" cognitive characteristics as humans, while other vertebrates such as teleost fishes are more "primitive", which has led to them being understudied. Despite this, increasing evidence indicates that fish possess not just capabilities that cannot be explained through Pavlovian and operant conditioning alone, such as reversal learning, novel obstacle avoidance, and passing simultaneous two-choice tasks, but also even more complex capabilities such as navigational cognitive mapping , [ 176 ] [ 177 ] [ 178 ] inhibitory motor control , [ 179 ] and empathy enabled by oxytocin to sense fear in other fish.

[ 180 ] Similarly in reptiles , a 2019 review of evidence indicates they can experience numerous emotions, such as pleasure and anxiety.

[ 181 ] See also [ edit ] In general Anthropomorphism Biosemiotics Cognitive psychology Deception in animals Embodied cognition Evolution of cognition Human–animal communication Number sense in animals Pain in invertebrates § Cognitive abilities Tool use by animals Uplift (science fiction) Zoopharmacognosy Zoosemiotics By group Bird intelligence Cetacean intelligence Dog intelligence Fish intelligence Insect cognition Plant cognition Equine intelligence References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Shettleworth SJ (2010).

Cognition, Evolution and Behavior (2ND ed.). New York: Oxford Press.

^ Krueger K , Heinze J (July 2008).

"Horse sense: social status of horses (Equus caballus) affects their likelihood of copying other horses' behavior" (PDF) .

Animal Cognition .

11 (3): 431– 9.

doi : 10.1007/s10071-007-0133-0 .

PMID 18183432 .

S2CID 16621030 .

^ Krueger K , Farmer K, Heinze J (May 2014).

"The effects of age, rank and neophobia on social learning in horses" (PDF) .

Animal Cognition .

17 (3): 645– 55.

doi : 10.1007/s10071-013-0696-x .

PMID 24170136 .

S2CID 13326701 .

^ Schuetz A, Farmer K, Krueger K (May 2017).

"Social learning across species: horses (Equus caballus) learn from humans by observation" (PDF) .

Animal Cognition .

20 (3): 567– 573.

doi : 10.1007/s10071-016-1060-8 .

PMID 27866286 .

S2CID 3957230 .

^ "Reptiles known as 'living rocks' show surprising cognitive powers" .

Nature .

576 (7785): 10. 2019-11-29.

Bibcode : 2019Natur.576...10.

.

doi : 10.1038/d41586-019-03655-5 .

S2CID 208613023 .

^ Shettleworth SJ (2010).

Cognition, Evolution and Behavior (2ND ed.). New York: Oxford Press.

^ Descartes R (1649).

Passions of the Soul .

^ "Crows understand water displacement at the level of a small child: Show causal understanding of a 5- to 7-year-old child" .

ScienceDaily . Retrieved 2019-12-08 .

^ Pliny the Elder (1855).

The Natural History of Pliny . Vol. 2. H. G. Bohn.

ISBN 9780598910769 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Corcilius K, Gregoric P (2013-01-01). "Aristotle's Model of Animal Motion".

Phronesis .

58 (1): 52– 97.

doi : 10.1163/15685284-12341242 .

S2CID 52242579 .

^ Morgan CL (1903).

An Introduction to Comparative Psychology (2 ed.). W. Scott, London. pp.

59 .

^ Darwin C (1871).

The descent of man, and selection in relation to sex .

^ Romanes JG (1883).

Animal Intelligence .

^ Dewsbury D (1978).

Comparative Animal Behavior . New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Book Company.

^ a b Thorndike EL (1911).

Animal Intelligence . New York: Macmillan.

^ Pavlov IP (1928).

Lectures on conditioned reflexes .

^ Watson JB (1913). "Psychology as the Behaviorist Views it".

Psychological Review .

20 (2): 158– 177.

doi : 10.1037/h0074428 .

hdl : 21.11116/0000-0001-9182-7 .

S2CID 145372026 .

^ Miller S, Konorski J (1928). "Sur une forme particulière des reflexes conditionels".

Comptes Rendus des Séances de la Société de Biologie et de Ses Filiales .

99 : 1155– 1157.

^ Skinner BF (1932).

The Behavior of Organisms .

^ Hull CL (1943).

The Principles of Behavior .

^ Skinner BF (1976).

About Behaviorism .

^ a b Köhler W (1917).

The Mentality of Apes .

^ Tolman EC (1948). "Cognitive maps in rats and men".

Psychological Review .

55 (4): 189– 208.

doi : 10.1037/h0061626 .

PMID 18870876 .

S2CID 42496633 .

^ Niesser U (1967).

Cognitive Psychology .

^ Hebb DO (1958).

A Textbook of Psychology . p. 3.

^ Menzel R, Fischer J (2010).

Animal Thinking: Contemporary Issues in Comparative Cognition . p. 2.

^ a b c d Wasserman EA, Zentall TR, eds. (2006).

Comparative cognition: Experimental explorations of animal intelligence . USA: Oxford University Press. p. 8 ff.

^ Foster JJ, Smolka J, Nilsson DE, Dacke M (January 2018).

"How animals follow the stars" .

Proceedings. Biological Sciences .

285 (1871): 20172322.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2017.2322 .

PMC 5805938 .

PMID 29367394 .

^ Grandin T, Johnson C (January 2010).

Animals Make Us Human: Creating the Best Life for Animals . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

^ Stebbins WC, Berkley MA (1990).

Comparative Perception, Vol. I, Basic Mechanisms; Vol. II, Complex Signals . New York: Wiley.

^ Smith EE, Kosslyn SM (2007).

Cognitive Psychology: Mind and Brain . Pearson Prentice Hall.

^ Blough DS (2006). "Reaction-time explorations of visual attention, perception, and decision in pigeons.". In Wasserman EA, Zentall TR (eds.).

Comparative Cognition: Experimental Explorations of Animal Intelligence' . New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

89– 105.

^ Mackintosh NJ (1983).

Conditioning and Associative Learning . New York: Oxford University Press.

^ Kamin LJ (1969). "Predictability, surprise, attention, and conditioning". In Campbell BA, Church RM (eds.).

Punishment and Aversive Behavior . New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts. pp.

279– 296.

^ Mackintosh NJ (1994).

Animal Learning and Cognition . San Diego: Academic Press.

^ Zentall TR (April 2005). "Selective and divided attention in animals".

Behavioural Processes .

69 (1): 1– 15.

doi : 10.1016/j.beproc.2005.01.004 .

PMID 15795066 .

S2CID 24601938 .

^ Blough DS (October 1969). "Attention shifts in a maintained discrimination".

Science .

166 (3901): 125– 6.

Bibcode : 1969Sci...166..125B .

doi : 10.1126/science.166.3901.125 .

PMID 5809588 .

S2CID 33256491 .

^ Tinbergen L (1960). "The natural control of insects in pine woods: I. Factors influencing the intensity of predation by songbirds".

Archives Néerlandaises de Zoologie .

13 : 265– 343.

doi : 10.1163/036551660X00053 .

^ Pietrewicz AT, Kamil AC (February 1977).

"Visual Detection of Cryptic Prey by Blue Jays (Cyanocitta cristata)" .

Science .

195 (4278): 580– 2.

Bibcode : 1977Sci...195..580P .

doi : 10.1126/science.195.4278.580 .

PMID 17732294 .

S2CID 10858793 .

^ Pietrewicz AT, Kamil AC (June 1979).

"Search Image Formation in the Blue Jay (Cyanocitta cristata)" .

Science .

204 (4399): 1332– 3.

Bibcode : 1979Sci...204.1332P .

doi : 10.1126/science.204.4399.1332 .

PMID 17813172 .

S2CID 14809014 .

^ Blough PM (1989). "Attentional priming and visual search in pigeons".

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Learning and Cognition .

17 (4): 292– 298.

doi : 10.1037/0097-7403.17.3.292 .

PMID 2794871 .

^ Kamil AC, Bond AB (2006). "Selective attention, priming, and foraging behavior.". In Wasserman EA, Zentall TR (eds.).

Comparative Cognition: Experimental Exploration of Animal Intelligence . New York: Oxford University Press.

^ Blough DS, Blough PM (1990). "Reaction-time assessments of visual processes in pigeons.". In Berkley M, Stebbins W (eds.).

Comparative perception . New York: Wiley. pp.

245– 276.

^ Smith EE, Medin DL (1981).

Categories and Concepts . Harvard Univ. Press.

^ a b c d e Zentall TR, Wasserman EA, Lazareva OF, Thompson RK, Rattermann MJ (2008).

"Concept Learning in Animals" .

Comparative Cognition & Behavior Reviews .

3 : 13– 45.

doi : 10.3819/ccbr.2008.30002 .

^ Dooling RJ, Okanoya K (1995). "Psychophysical methods for assessing perceptual categories.". In Klump GM, Dooling RJ, Fay RR, Stebbins WC (eds.).

Methods in Comparative Psychoacoustics . Basel, Switzerland: Birkhäuser Verlag. pp.

307– 318.

^ Herrnstein RJ, Loveland DH (October 1964). "Complex Visual Concept in the Pigeon".

Science .

146 (3643): 549– 51.

Bibcode : 1964Sci...146..549H .

doi : 10.1126/science.146.3643.549 .

PMID 14190250 .

S2CID 11940233 .

^ Herrnstein RJ (1979). "Acquisition, Generalization, and Discrimination Reversal of a Natural Concept".

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes .

5 (2): 116– 129.

doi : 10.1037/0097-7403.5.2.116 .

PMID 528881 .

^ Bhatt RS, Wasserman EA, Reynolds WF, Knauss KS (July 1988). "Conceptual behavior in pigeons: Categorization of both familiar and novel examples from four classes of natural and artificial stimuli".

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes .

14 (3): 219– 234.

doi : 10.1037/0097-7403.14.3.219 .

^ Tu HW, Smith EW, Dooling RJ (November 2011).

"Acoustic and perceptual categories of vocal elements in the warble song of budgerigars (Melopsittacus undulatus)" .

Journal of Comparative Psychology .

125 (4): 420– 30.

doi : 10.1037/a0024396 .

PMC 4497543 .

PMID 22142040 .

^ Avarguès-Weber A, Dyer AG, Giurfa M (March 2011).

"Conceptualization of above and below relationships by an insect" .

Proceedings. Biological Sciences .

278 (1707): 898– 905.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2010.1891 .

PMC 3049051 .

PMID 21068040 .

^ Vaughan Jr W (1988). "Formation of equivalence sets in pigeons".

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes .

14 : 36– 42.

doi : 10.1037/0097-7403.14.1.36 .

^ D'Amato MR, Colombo M (April 1988). "Representation of serial order in monkeys (Cebus apella)".

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes .

14 (2): 131– 9.

doi : 10.1037/0097-7403.14.2.131 .

PMID 3367099 .

^ Murphy RA, Mondragón E, Murphy VA (March 2008).

"Rule learning by rats" (PDF) .

Science .

319 (5871): 1849– 51.

Bibcode : 2008Sci...319.1849M .

doi : 10.1126/science.1151564 .

PMID 18369151 .

S2CID 591112 .

^ Kundey SM, Strandell B, Mathis H, Rowan JD (2010). "Learning of monotonic and nonmonotonic sequences in domesticated horses ( Equus callabus ) and chickens ( Gallus domesticus )".

Learning and Motivation .

14 (3): 213– 223.

doi : 10.1016/j.lmot.2010.04.006 .

^ Wright AA, Santiago HC, Sands SF, Kendrick DF, Cook RG (July 1985). "Memory processing of serial lists by pigeons, monkeys, and people".

Science .

229 (4710): 287– 9.

Bibcode : 1985Sci...229..287W .

doi : 10.1126/science.9304205 .

PMID 9304205 .

^ Balda R, Kamil AC (1992). "Long-term spatial memory in Clark's nutcracker, Nucifraga columbiana ".

Animal Behaviour .

44 (4): 761– 769.

doi : 10.1016/S0003-3472(05)80302-1 .

S2CID 54277040 .

^ Greggers U, Menzel R (1993). "Memory dynamics and foraging strategies of honeybees".

Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology .

32 (1): 17– 29.

Bibcode : 1993BEcoS..32...17G .

doi : 10.1007/BF00172219 .

S2CID 36624838 .

^ Menzel R (1993).

"Associative learning in honey-bees" .

Apidologie .

24 (3): 157– 168.

doi : 10.1051/apido:19930301 .

^ Wüstenberg D, Gerber B, Menzel R (August 1998). "Short communication: long- but not medium-term retention of olfactory memories in honeybees is impaired by actinomycin D and anisomycin".

The European Journal of Neuroscience .

10 (8): 2742– 5.

doi : 10.1046/j.1460-9568.1998.00319.x .

PMID 9767405 .

S2CID 23691527 .

^ Hammer M, Menzel R (March 1995).

"Learning and memory in the honeybee" .

The Journal of Neuroscience .

15 (3 Pt 1): 1617– 30.

doi : 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.15-03-01617.1995 .

PMC 6578179 .

PMID 7891123 .

^ a b University of Exeter (2020-12-28).

"Big bumblebees learn locations of best flowers" .

Phys.org . Retrieved 2020-12-29 .

^ a b Frasnelli, Elisa; Robert, Théo; Chow, Pizza Ka Yee; Scales, Ben; Gibson, Sam; Manning, Nicola; Philippides, Andrew O.; Collett, Thomas S.; Hempel de Ibarra, Natalie (2020).

"Small and Large Bumblebees Invest Differently when Learning about Flowers" .

Current Biology .

31 (5).

Elsevier BV: 1058–1064.e3.

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2020.11.062 .

hdl : 10871/124274 .

ISSN 0960-9822 .

PMID 33373638 .

^ Yamada A, Sekiguchi T, Suzuki H, Mizukami A (March 1992).

"Behavioral analysis of internal memory states using cooling-induced retrograde amnesia in Limax flavus" .

The Journal of Neuroscience .

12 (3): 729– 35.

doi : 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.12-03-00729.1992 .

PMC 6576046 .

PMID 1545237 .

^ Hunter WS (1913).

The delayed reaction in animals and children . Behavior Monographs. Vol. 2.

^ Blough DS (April 1959).

"Delayed matching in the pigeon" .

Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior .

2 (2): 151– 60.

doi : 10.1901/jeab.1959.2-151 .

PMC 1403892 .

PMID 13801643 .

^ Shettleworth SJ (2010).

Cognition, Evolution, and Behavior (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-971781-1 .

^ Vorhees CV, Williams MT (2006).

"Morris water maze: procedures for assessing spatial and related forms of learning and memory" .

Nature Protocols .

1 (2): 848– 58.

doi : 10.1038/nprot.2006.116 .

PMC 2895266 .

PMID 17406317 .

^ Antunes M, Biala G (May 2012).

"The novel object recognition memory: neurobiology, test procedure, and its modifications" .

Cognitive Processing .

13 (2): 93– 110.

doi : 10.1007/s10339-011-0430-z .

PMC 3332351 .

PMID 22160349 .

^ a b Brown MF, Cook RG, eds. (2006).

Animal Spatial Cognition: Comparative, Neural, and Computational Approaches. [On-line] . Archived from the original on 2022-03-02 . Retrieved 2020-09-29 .

^ Lund N (2002).

Animal cognition . Psychology Press. p. 4.

ISBN 978-0-415-25298-0 .

^ Treisman AM, Gelade G (January 1980). "A feature-integration theory of attention".

Cognitive Psychology .

12 (1): 97– 136.

doi : 10.1016/0010-0285(80)90005-5 .

PMID 7351125 .

S2CID 353246 .

^ Sherwin CM (2001). "Can invertebrates suffer? Or, how robust is argument-by-analogy?".

Animal Welfare .

10 (supplement): S103 – S118 .

doi : 10.1017/S0962728600023551 .

S2CID 54126137 .

^ Gauthreaux SA (1980).

Animal Migration, Orientation, and Navigation . Academic Press.

^ Savolainen P, Zhang YP, Luo J, Lundeberg J, Leitner T (November 2002). "Genetic evidence for an East Asian origin of domestic dogs".

Science .

298 (5598): 1610– 3.

Bibcode : 2002Sci...298.1610S .

doi : 10.1126/science.1073906 .

PMID 12446907 .

S2CID 32583311 .

^ Fiset S, Plourde V (May 2013). "Object permanence in domestic dogs (Canis lupus familiaris) and gray wolves (Canis lupus)".

Journal of Comparative Psychology .

127 (2): 115– 27.

doi : 10.1037/a0030595 .

PMID 23106804 .

^ Bräuer J, Kaminski J, Riedel J, Call J, Tomasello M (February 2006). "Making inferences about the location of hidden food: social dog, causal ape".

Journal of Comparative Psychology .

120 (1): 38– 47.

doi : 10.1037/0735-7036.120.1.38 .

PMID 16551163 .

S2CID 10162449 .

^ Webb AR (2003).

"The physiology of circadian rhythms in plants" .

New Phytologist .

160 (2): 281– 303.

Bibcode : 2003NewPh.160..281W .

doi : 10.1046/j.1469-8137.2003.00895.x .

PMID 33832173 .

S2CID 15688409 .

^ Call JE, Burghardt GM, Pepperberg IM, Snowdon CT, Zentall TE, eds. (2017). "Chapter 23 : Timing in Animals".

APA handbook of comparative psychology: Perception, learning, and cognition . Vol. 2. Washington D.C.: APA.

^ Henderson J, Hurly TA, Bateson M, Healy SD (March 2006).

"Timing in free-living rufous hummingbirds, Selasphorus rufus" .

Current Biology .

16 (5): 512– 5.

Bibcode : 2006CBio...16..512H .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2006.01.054 .

PMID 16527747 .

^ Gibbon J (1977). "Scalar expectancy theory and Weber's law in animal timing".

Psychological Review .

84 (3): 279– 325.

doi : 10.1037/0033-295x.84.3.279 .

^ Killeen PR (1991). "Behavior's time.". In Bower G (ed.).

The psychology of learning and motivation . Vol. 27. New York: Academic Press. pp.

294– 334.

^ Machado A, Pata P (2005).

"Testing the Scalar Expectancy Theory (SET) and the Learning to Time model (LeT) in a double bisection task" .

Animal Learning & Behavior .

33 (1): 111– 122.

doi : 10.3758/BF03196055 .

PMID 15971498 .

S2CID 16623835 .

^ Roach J (February 22, 2007).

"Chimps Use "Spears" to Hunt Mammals, Study Says" .

National Geographic News . Archived from the original on February 24, 2007 . Retrieved June 12, 2010 .

^ Hunt GR (1996). "Manufacture and use of hook-tools by New Caledonian crows".

Nature .

379 (6562): 249– 251.

Bibcode : 1996Natur.379..249H .

doi : 10.1038/379249a0 .

S2CID 4352835 .

^ a b Shettleworth SJ (December 2012). "Do animals have insight, and what is insight anyway?".

Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology .

66 (4): 217– 26.

doi : 10.1037/a0030674 .

PMID 23231629 .

^ Pallardy, R (May 28, 2020).

"African gray parrot" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

^ Caldwell, M (January 2000). "Polly Wanna PhD?".

Discover .

21 .

^ Partal, Y. "Animal intelligence: The Smartest Animal Species in the World".

Zoo Portraits .

^ Com, Scienceblog (28 September 2011).

"Video shows first tool use by a fish" .

ScienceBlog.com .

^ Bernardi G (2011).

"The use of tools by wrasses (Labridae)" .

Coral Reefs .

31 : 39.

doi : 10.1007/s00338-011-0823-6 .

S2CID 37924172 .

^ Henriques, Martha (25 July 2022).

"The mysterious inner life of the octopus" .

BBC . Retrieved 2024-06-29 .

^ a b Piero, Amodio (2020).

"Bipedal locomotion in Octopus vulgaris: A complementary observation and some preliminary considerations" .

Ecology and Evolution .

11 (9): 3679– 3684.

Bibcode : 2021EcoEv..11.3679A .

doi : 10.1002/ece3.7328 .

PMC 8093653 .

PMID 33976767 .

^ a b Finn JK, Tregenza T, Norman MD (December 2009).

"Defensive tool use in a coconut-carrying octopus" .

Current Biology .

19 (23): R1069-70.

Bibcode : 2009CBio...19R1069F .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2009.10.052 .

PMID 20064403 .

S2CID 26835945 .

^ Möglich MH, Alpert GD (1979). "Stone dropping by Conomyrma bicolor (Hymenoptera: Formicidae): A new technique of interference competition".

Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology .

2 (6): 105– 113.

Bibcode : 1979BEcoS...6..105M .

doi : 10.1007/bf00292556 .

JSTOR 4599265 .

S2CID 27266459 .

^ For chimpanzees, see for example Premack D , Premack AJ (1983).

The Mind of an Ape . New York: Norton.

ISBN 978-0-393-30160-1 .

OCLC 152413818 .

^ Pepperberg IM (1999).

The Alex Studies: Cognitive and Communicative Abilities of Grey Parrots . Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.

^ Tebbich S, Seed AM, Emery NJ, Clayton NS (April 2007). "Non-tool-using rooks, Corvus frugilegus, solve the trap-tube problem".

Animal Cognition .

10 (2): 225– 31.

doi : 10.1007/s10071-006-0061-4 .

PMID 17171360 .

S2CID 13611664 .

^ Taylor AH, Hunt GR, Medina FS, Gray RD (January 2009).

"Do new caledonian crows solve physical problems through causal reasoning?" .

Proceedings. Biological Sciences .

276 (1655): 247– 54.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2008.1107 .

PMC 2674354 .

PMID 18796393 .

^ Audet JN, Ducatez S, Lefebvre L (2015).

"The town bird and the country bird: problem solving and immunocompetence vary with urbanization" .

Behavioral Ecology .

27 (2): 637– 644.

doi : 10.1093/beheco/arv201 .

^ Harding EJ, Paul ES, Mendl M (January 2004).

"Animal behaviour: cognitive bias and affective state" .

Nature .

427 (6972): 312.

Bibcode : 2004Natur.427..312H .

doi : 10.1038/427312a .

PMID 14737158 .

S2CID 4411418 .

^ Rygula R, Pluta H, Popik P (2012).

"Laughing rats are optimistic" .

PLOS ONE .

7 (12): e51959.

Bibcode : 2012PLoSO...751959R .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0051959 .

PMC 3530570 .

PMID 23300582 .

^ Haselton MG, Nettle D, Andrews PW (2005). "The evolution of cognitive bias". In Buss DM (ed.).

The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology . Hoboken, NJ, US: John Wiley & Sons Inc. pp.

724– 746.

^ Terrace HS, Petitto LA, Sanders RJ, Bever TG (November 1979). "Can an ape create a sentence?".

Science .

206 (4421). New York, N.Y.: 891– 902.

Bibcode : 1979Sci...206..891T .

doi : 10.1126/science.504995 .

PMID 504995 .

^ Herman, L. M.; Richards, D. G.; Wolz, J. P. (1984).

"Comprehension of sentences by bottlenosed dolphins" .

Cognition .

16 (2): 129– 219.

doi : 10.1016/0010-0277(84)90003-9 .

PMID 6540652 .

^ Lim, Teckwyn (2023).

"From the mouth of the mahout: a review of elephant command words" . In Lainé, De Nicolas; Keil, P. G.; Khatijah Rahmat (eds.).

Composing Worlds with Elephants: Interdisciplinary Dialogues . Marseille: IRD Éditions. pp.

137– 155.

ISBN 978-2-7099-2993-6 .

^ Köhler W (1917).

Mentality of Apes .

^ Foerder P, Galloway M, Barthel T, Moore DE, Reiss D (2011). Samuel A (ed.).

"Insightful problem solving in an Asian elephant" .

PLOS ONE .

6 (8): e23251.

Bibcode : 2011PLoSO...623251F .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0023251 .

PMC 3158079 .

PMID 21876741 .

^ Brannon EM, Terrace HS (January 2000).

"Representation of the numerosities 1-9 by rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta)" (PDF) .

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes .

26 (1): 31– 49.

doi : 10.1037/0097-7403.26.1.31 .

PMID 10650542 .

^ Reznikova Z, Ryabko B (2001). "A Study of Ants' Numerical Competence".

Electronic Transactions on Artificial Intelligence .

5 : 111– 126.

^ Reznikova ZI (2007).

Animal Intelligence: From Individual to Social Cognition . Cambridge University Press.

^ Reznikova ZI (1999). "Ethological mechanisms of population dynamic in species ant communities".

Russian Journal of Ecology .

30 (3): 187– 197.

^ Brown MJ, Gordon DM (2000). "How resources and encounters affect the distribution of foraging activity in a seed-harvesting ants".

Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology .

47 (3): 195– 203.

Bibcode : 2000BEcoS..47..195B .

doi : 10.1007/s002650050011 .

S2CID 15454830 .

^ Reznikova, Zhanna; Ryabko, Boris (2011). "Numerical competence in animals, with an insight from ants".

Behaviour .

148 (4): 405– 434.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.303.1824 .

doi : 10.1163/000579511X568562 .

^ Reznikova, Zhanna (2017).

Studying Animal Language Without Translation: An Insight From Ants . Switzerland: Springer.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-44918-0 .

ISBN 978-3-319-44916-6 .

^ Carazo P, Font E, Forteza-Behrendt E, Desfilis E (May 2009). "Quantity discrimination in Tenebrio molitor: evidence of numerosity discrimination in an invertebrate?".

Animal Cognition .

12 (3): 463– 70.

doi : 10.1007/s10071-008-0207-7 .

PMID 19118405 .

S2CID 14502342 .

^ Dacke M, Srinivasan MV (October 2008). "Evidence for counting in insects".

Animal Cognition .

11 (4): 683– 9.

doi : 10.1007/s10071-008-0159-y .

PMID 18504627 .

S2CID 22273226 .

^ Anderson US, Stoinski TS, Bloomsmith MA, Marr MJ, Smith AD, Maple TL (August 2005). "Relative numerousness judgment and summation in young and old Western lowland gorillas".

Journal of Comparative Psychology .

119 (3): 285– 95.

doi : 10.1037/0735-7036.119.3.285 .

PMID 16131257 .

^ Boysen ST, Berntson GG, Mukobi KL (March 2001).

"Size matters: impact of item size and quantity on array choice by chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes)" .

Journal of Comparative Psychology .

115 (1): 106– 10.

doi : 10.1037/0735-7036.115.1.106 .

PMID 11334213 .

^ Uller C, Jaeger R, Guidry G, Martin C (June 2003). "Salamanders ( Plethodon cinereus) go for more: rudiments of number in an amphibian".

Animal Cognition .

6 (2): 105– 12.

doi : 10.1007/s10071-003-0167-x .

PMID 12709845 .

S2CID 147018 .

^ Vonk J, Beran MJ (July 2012).

"Bears "Count" Too: Quantity Estimation and Comparison in Black Bears (Ursus Americanus)" .

Animal Behaviour .

84 (1): 231– 238.

doi : 10.1016/j.anbehav.2012.05.001 .

PMC 3398692 .

PMID 22822244 .

^ Jaakkola K, Fellner W, Erb L, Rodriguez M, Guarino E (August 2005). "Understanding of the concept of numerically "less" by bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus)".

Journal of Comparative Psychology .

119 (3): 296– 303.

doi : 10.1037/0735-7036.119.3.296 .

PMID 16131258 .

^ Pepperberg IM (October 2006). "Grey parrot numerical competence: a review".

Animal Cognition .

9 (4): 377– 91.

doi : 10.1007/s10071-006-0034-7 .

PMID 16909236 .

S2CID 30689821 .

^ Gómez-Laplaza LM, Gerlai R (January 2011). "Can angelfish (Pterophyllum scalare) count? Discrimination between different shoal sizes follows Weber's law".

Animal Cognition .

14 (1): 1– 9.

doi : 10.1007/s10071-010-0337-6 .

PMID 20607574 .

S2CID 26488837 .

^ King D, Green B (1999).

Goannas: The Biology of Varanid Lizards . University of New South Wales Press. p. 43.

ISBN 0-86840-456-X .

^ Reader SM, Hager Y, Laland KN (April 2011).

"The evolution of primate general and cultural intelligence" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences .

366 (1567): 1017– 27.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2010.0342 .

PMC 3049098 .

PMID 21357224 .

^ Locurto C, Durkin E. "Problem-solving and individual differences in mice (Mus musculus) using water reinforcement".

J Comp Psychol .

^ Locurto C, Scanlon C (1998). "Individual differences and a spatial learning factor in two strains of mice (Mus musculus)".

J. Comp. Psychol .

112 (4): 344– 352.

doi : 10.1037/0735-7036.112.4.344 .

^ Kamphaus RW (2005).

Clinical assessment of child and adolescent intelligence . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 978-0-387-29149-9 .

^ a b Poirier, Marc-Antoine; Kozlovsky, Dovid Y.; Morand-Ferron, Julie; Careau, Vincent (2020-12-09).

"How general is cognitive ability in non-human animals? A meta-analytical and multi-level reanalysis approach" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

287 (1940): 20201853.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2020.1853 .

ISSN 0962-8452 .

PMC 7739923 .

PMID 33290683 .

^ Rushton JP (2004). "Placing intelligence into an evolutionary framework or how g fits into the r–K matrix of life-history traits including longevity".

Intelligence .

32 (4): 321– 328.

doi : 10.1016/j.intell.2004.06.003 .

^ van Schaik CP, Burkart JM (April 2011).

"Social learning and evolution: the cultural intelligence hypothesis" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences .

366 (1567): 1008– 16.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2010.0304 .

PMC 3049085 .

PMID 21357223 .

^ Herrmann E, Call J, Hernàndez-Lloreda MV, Hare B, Tomasello M (September 2007). "Humans have evolved specialized skills of social cognition: the cultural intelligence hypothesis".

Science .

317 (5843): 1360– 6.

Bibcode : 2007Sci...317.1360H .

doi : 10.1126/science.1146282 .

PMID 17823346 .

S2CID 686663 .

^ Plomin R (February 2001). "The genetics of g in human and mouse".

Nature Reviews. Neuroscience .

2 (2): 136– 41.

doi : 10.1038/35053584 .

PMID 11252993 .

S2CID 205013267 .

^ Anderson B (2000). "Chapter 5: The g Factor in Non-Human Animals". In Bock GR, Goode JA, Webb K (eds.).

The Nature of Intelligence: Novartis Foundation Symposium 233 . Novartis Foundation Symposia. Vol. 233.

Wiley . pp.

79– 90, discussion 90–5.

doi : 10.1002/0470870850.ch5 .

ISBN 978-0-471-49434-8 .

PMID 11276911 .

^ Premack D, Woodruff G (1978).

"Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind?" .

Behavioral and Brain Sciences .

1 (4): 515– 526.

doi : 10.1017/S0140525X00076512 .

^ Bugnyar T, Reber SA, Buckner C (February 2016).

"Ravens attribute visual access to unseen competitors" .

Nature Communications .

7 : 10506.

Bibcode : 2016NatCo...710506B .

doi : 10.1038/ncomms10506 .

PMC 4740864 .

PMID 26835849 .

^ Bischof-Köhler D (1991). "The development of empathy in infants". In Lamb ME, Keller H (eds.).

Infant Development. Perspectives from German speaking countries . Routledge. pp.

245– 273.

ISBN 978-1-317-72827-6 .

^ Prior H, Schwarz A, Güntürkün O (August 2008).

"Mirror-induced behavior in the magpie (Pica pica): evidence of self-recognition" .

PLOS Biology .

6 (8): e202.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.0060202 .

PMC 2517622 .

PMID 18715117 .

^ Gallop GG (January 1970). "Chimpanzees: self-recognition".

Science .

167 (3914): 86– 7.

Bibcode : 1970Sci...167...86G .

doi : 10.1126/science.167.3914.86 .

PMID 4982211 .

S2CID 145295899 .

^ Walraven V, van Elsacker L, Verheyen R (1995). "Reactions of a group of pygmy chimpanzees (Pan paniscus) to their mirror images: evidence of self-recognition".

Primates .

36 : 145– 150.

doi : 10.1007/bf02381922 .

S2CID 38985498 .

^ Patterson FG, Cohn RH (1994). "Self-recognition and self-awareness in lowland gorillas". In Parker ST, Mitchell R, Boccia M (eds.).

Self-awareness in animals and humans: developmental perspectives . New York: Cambridge University Press. pp.

273– 290.

^ Prior H, Schwarz A, Güntürkün O (August 2008). De Waal F (ed.).

"Mirror-induced behavior in the magpie (Pica pica): evidence of self-recognition" .

PLOS Biology .

6 (8): e202.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.0060202 .

PMC 2517622 .

PMID 18715117 .

^ Marten K, Psarakos S (1995).

"Evidence of self-awareness in the bottlenose dolphin ( Tursiops truncatus )" . In Parker ST, Mitchell R, Boccia M (eds.).

Self-awareness in Animals and Humans: Developmental Perspectives . Cambridge University Press. pp.

361– 379. Archived from the original on 13 October 2008.

^ Reiss D, Marino L (May 2001).

"Mirror self-recognition in the bottlenose dolphin: a case of cognitive convergence" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

98 (10): 5937– 42.

Bibcode : 2001PNAS...98.5937R .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.101086398 .

PMC 33317 .

PMID 11331768 .

^ Delfour F, Marten K (April 2001). "Mirror image processing in three marine mammal species: killer whales (Orcinus orca), false killer whales (Pseudorca crassidens) and California sea lions (Zalophus californianus)".

Behavioural Processes .

53 (3): 181– 190.

doi : 10.1016/s0376-6357(01)00134-6 .

PMID 11334706 .

S2CID 31124804 .

^ Plotnik JM, de Waal FB, Reiss D (November 2006).

"Self-recognition in an Asian elephant" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

103 (45): 17053– 7.

Bibcode : 2006PNAS..10317053P .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0608062103 .

PMC 1636577 .

PMID 17075063 .

^ Lea SE (2010).

"Concept learning in nonprimate mammals: In search of evidence" . In Mareschal D, Quinn PC, Lea SE (eds.).

The Making of Human Concepts . Oxford University Press. pp.

173– 199.

ISBN 978-0-19-954922-1 .

^ Meng J (2012).

"The Superior Human?" . Documentary. Transcription on the official website.

The Superior Human .

^ Gatti RC (2015). "Self-consciousness: beyond the looking-glass and what dogs found there".

Ethology Ecology & Evolution .

28 (2): 232– 240.

doi : 10.1080/03949370.2015.1102777 .

S2CID 217507938 .

^ Couchman JJ, Coutinho MV, Beran MJ, Smith JD (November 2010).

"Beyond stimulus cues and reinforcement signals: a new approach to animal metacognition" (PDF) .

Journal of Comparative Psychology .

124 (4): 356– 68.

doi : 10.1037/a0020129 .

PMC 2991470 .

PMID 20836592 .

^ "Rats Capable Of Reflecting On Mental Processes" .

ScienceDaily . 9 March 2007.

^ Foote AL, Crystal JD (March 2007).

"Metacognition in the rat" .

Current Biology .

17 (6): 551– 5.

Bibcode : 2007CBio...17..551F .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2007.01.061 .

PMC 1861845 .

PMID 17346969 .

^ Smith JD, Beran MJ, Couchman JJ, Coutinho MV (August 2008).

"The comparative study of metacognition: sharper paradigms, safer inferences" .

Psychonomic Bulletin & Review .

15 (4): 679– 91.

doi : 10.3758/PBR.15.4.679 .

PMC 4607312 .

PMID 18792496 .

^ Jozefowiez J, Staddon JE, Cerutti DT (2009).

"Metacognition in animals: how do we know that they know?" .

Comparative Cognition & Behavior Reviews .

4 : 29– 39.

doi : 10.3819/ccbr.2009.40003 .

^ "The Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness" (PDF) . Retrieved 12 August 2012 .

^ Breland K, Breland M (1961). "The misbehavior of organisms".

American Psychologist .

16 (11): 681– 684.

doi : 10.1037/h0040090 .

S2CID 51818837 .

^ Brett-Surman MK, Holtz TR, Farlow JO, eds. (2012-06-27).

The complete dinosaur . Illustrated by Bob Walters (2nd ed.). Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press. pp.

191– 208.

ISBN 978-0-253-00849-7 .

^ Moore J (1999).

"Allometry" .

University of California San Diego. Archived from the original on 2013-08-07 . Retrieved 2014-08-18 .

^ Fabre JH (1919).

The Hunting Wasps . New York: Dodd, Mead and Company.

ISBN 978-1587760280 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Morgan CL (1920).

Animal Behaviour (Second ed.). London: Edward Arnold.

^ Köhler W (1925). Winter E (ed.).

The mentality of apes, transl (2nd German ed.). London: Kegan, Trench.

ISBN 978-0871401083 .

Original was Intelligenzprüfungen an Anthropoiden, Berlin 1917. 2nd German edition was titled Intelligenzprüfungen an Menschenaffen, Berlin: Springer 1921.

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Povinelli DJ, Eddy TJ (1996).

What young chimpanzees know about seeing . Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development. Vol. 61. pp.

1– 189.

^ Nissani M (2005). "Do Asian elephants apply causal reasoning to tool use tasks? 31: 91–96".

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes .

31 : 91– 96.

^ Campbell CB, Hodos W (September 1991). "The Scala naturae revisited: evolutionary scales and anagenesis in comparative psychology".

Journal of Comparative Psychology .

105 (3): 211– 21.

doi : 10.1037/0735-7036.105.3.211 .

PMID 1935002 .

^ Gopnik A (May 2016).

"How Animals Think; A new look at what humans can learn from nonhuman minds" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 25 April 2016 .

^ (see Shettleworth (1998), Reznikova 2007)).

^ "Humans are not smarter than animals - we just don't understand them" .

The Independent . 13 December 2013 . Retrieved 9 November 2022 .

^ Bräuer, Juliane; Hanus, Daniel; Pika, Simone; Gray, Russell; Uomini, Natalie (2 July 2020).

"Old and New Approaches to Animal Cognition: There Is Not "One Cognition" " .

Journal of Intelligence .

8 (3): 28.

doi : 10.3390/jintelligence8030028 .

PMC 7555673 .

PMID 32630788 .

^ Pinker, Steven (11 May 2010).

"The cognitive niche: Coevolution of intelligence, sociality, and language" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

107 (supplement_2): 8993– 8999.

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0914630107 .

PMC 3024014 .

PMID 20445094 .

^ Starr M (2017-12-31).

"13 Surprisingly Weird Reasons Why Crows And Ravens Are The Best Birds, No Question" .

ScienceAlert . Retrieved 2020-04-04 .

^ Mather JA, Kuba MJ (May 2013). "The cephalopod specialties: complex nervous systems, learning and cognition".

Canadian Journal of Zoology .

91 (6): 431– 449.

Bibcode : 2013CaJZ...91..431M .

doi : 10.1139/cjz-2013-0009 .

^ Haghighat L (12 April 2012).

"Baboons can learn to recognize words; Monkeys' ability suggests that reading taps into general systems of pattern recognition" .

Nature .

doi : 10.1038/nature.2012.10432 .

S2CID 178872255 .

^ Brown E (12 April 2012).

"Baboons can recognize written words, study finds; The monkeys don't assign meaning to them, but learn what letter combinations are common to real words, the study authors say" .

Los Angeles Times .

^ Bower B (5 May 2012).

"Baboons show their word skills; Reading may stem from a visual aptitude shared by all primates" .

ScienceNews .

^ Vinepinsky, Ehud; Cohen, Lear; Perchik, Shay; Ben-Shahar, Ohad; Donchin, Opher; Segev, Ronen (September 8, 2020).

"Representation of edges, head direction, and swimming kinematics in the brain of freely-navigating fish" .

Scientific Reports .

10 (1): 14762.

Bibcode : 2020NatSR..1014762V .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-020-71217-1 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 7479115 .

PMID 32901058 .

^ Rodríguez, Fernando; Quintero, Blanca; Amores, Lucas; Madrid, David; Salas-Peña, Carmen; Salas, Cosme (August 11, 2021).

"Spatial Cognition in Teleost Fish: Strategies and Mechanisms" .

Animals .

11 (8): 2271.

doi : 10.3390/ani11082271 .

ISSN 2076-2615 .

PMC 8388456 .

PMID 34438729 .

^ Aellen, Mélisande; Burkart, Judith M.; Bshary, Redouan (March 14, 2022).

"No evidence for general intelligence in a fish" .

Ethology .

128 (5): 424– 436.

Bibcode : 2022Ethol.128..424A .

doi : 10.1111/eth.13275 .

ISSN 0179-1613 .

^ Lucon-Xiccato, Tyrone; Gatto, Elia; Bisazza, Angelo (October 13, 2017).

"Fish perform like mammals and birds in inhibitory motor control tasks" .

Scientific Reports .

7 (1): 13144.

Bibcode : 2017NatSR...713144L .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-017-13447-4 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 5640690 .

PMID 29030593 .

^ Akinrinade, Ibukun; Kareklas, Kyriacos; Teles, Magda C.; Reis, Thais K.; Gliksberg, Michael; Petri, Giovanni; Levkowitz, Gil; Oliveira, Rui F. (March 23, 2023).

"Evolutionarily conserved role of oxytocin in social fear contagion in zebrafish" .

Science .

379 (6638): 1232– 1237.

Bibcode : 2023Sci...379.1232A .

doi : 10.1126/science.abq5158 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 36952426 .

^ Lambert, Helen; Carder, Gemma; D'Cruze, Neil (October 17, 2019).

"Given the Cold Shoulder: A Review of the Scientific Literature for Evidence of Reptile Sentience" .

Animals .

9 (10): 821.

doi : 10.3390/ani9100821 .

ISSN 2076-2615 .

PMC 6827095 .

PMID 31627409 .

Further reading [ edit ] Patrick Bateson (2017).

Behaviour, Development and Evolution .

Open Book Publishers .

doi : 10.11647/obp.0097 .

ISBN 978-1-80064-516-5 .

Brown MF, Cook RG, eds. (2006).

Animal Spatial Cognition: Comparative, Neural, and Computational Approaches .

Bekoff, Marc; Allen, Colin; Burghardt, Gordon, eds. (2002).

The Cognitive Animal: Empirical and Theoretical Perspectives on Animal Cognition .

MIT Press .

doi : 10.7551/mitpress/1885.001.0001 .

ISBN 9780262268028 .

Burghardt, Gordon (2005).

The Genesis of Animal Play: Testing the Limits .

MIT Press .

ISBN 9780262269551 .

Hilgard ER (1958).

Theories of learning (2nd ed.). London: Methuen.

Lurz RW (2009).

Mindreading Animals: The Debate over What Animals Know about Other Minds . The MIT Press.

Narby, Jeremy (2005).

Intelligence in nature : an inquiry into knowledge . New York: Jeremy P. Tarcher/Penguin.

ISBN 1585424617 .

Neisser U (1967).

Cognitive psychology . New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.

Romanes, George (1886).

Animal intelligence (4th ed.). London: Kegan Paul, Trench.

Shettleworth, Sara J.

(2010).

Cognition, evolution, and behavior (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195319842 .

Skinner BF (1969).

Contingencies of reinforcement: a theoretical analysis . New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.

de Waal F (2016).

Are We Smart Enough to Know How Smart Animals Are?

. W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0393246186 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Animal cognition .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Animal cognition .

Allen C.

"Animal Consciousness" . In Zalta EN (ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Andrews K.

"Animal Cognition" . In Zalta EN (ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Fox D (14 June 2011).

"The limits of intelligence" .

Scientific American .

305 (1): 36– 43.

Bibcode : 2011SciAm.305f..36F .

doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican0711-36 .

PMID 21717956 .

Kamil A , Bond A.

"Center for Avian Cognition" . University of Nebraska.

"Animal Cognition Network" . Archived from the original on 2008-05-09.

"Animal Minds" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Animal cognition Cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Great ape language Talking animal Talking bird Animal-made art Animal navigation Cognitive bias Cognitive ethology Comparative cognition Emotion Insect Mirror test Neuroethology Number sense Observational learning Primate archaeology Theory of mind Tool use sea otters Vocal learning Intelligence Bird Pigeon Cat Cephalopod Cetacean Dog Elephant Fish g factor in non-humans Primate Hominid Swarm Pain Pain in amphibians Pain in animals Pain in cephalopods Pain in crustaceans Pain in fish Pain in invertebrates Relation to brain Brain size Brain-to-body mass ratio Encephalization quotient Neuroscience and intelligence Number of neurons Category v t e Animal communication Concepts Animal training Animal language Animal cognition Anecdotal cognitivism Bioacoustics Deception in animals Tactical Ethology Evolutionary linguistics FOXP2 FOXP2 and human evolution Human–animal communication Mating call Origin of language Seismic communication Self-anointing in animals Talking animals Animal-specific Aquatic animals Whale vocalization Bees Bumblebees Birds Talking birds Cats Dogs Elephants Frogs Great ape language Yerkish Insects Lizards Wolves Related Roar Category:Talking birds Category:Individual apes involved in language studies v t e Animal rights Topics (overviews, concepts, issues, cases) Overviews Movement History ( Ancient world ) Timeline Europe United States By country or territory Argentina Australia Austria Azerbaijan Brazil Canada China Denmark Ethiopia France Germany Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Malaysia Mexico Netherlands Russia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom United States Anarchism Punk subculture Religion Christianity Indian religions Islam Women Concepts Abolitionism Ahimsa Animal cognition Animal consciousness Animal–industrial complex Animal law Animal machine Animal protectionism Animal trial Animal welfare Animal-free agriculture Anthropocentrism Argument from marginal cases Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness New York Declaration on Animal Consciousness Carnism Equal consideration of interests Emotion in animals Ethics of eating meat Ethics of uncertain sentience Holocaust analogy Insects in ethics Intrinsic value Meat paradox Mentophobia Moral circle expansion Nonviolence Nonkilling Open rescue Opposition to hunting Painism Personism Replaceability argument Sentientism Speciesism Total liberation Veganism Vegaphobia Vegetarianism Issues Animal husbandry Animal product Animal husbandry Battery cage Bile bear Chick culling Crocodiles CAFOs Cow-calf separation Feedback Fish Foam depopulation Fur Fur trade Insects Intensive Pigs Livestock Live export Poultry Wildlife Slaughter Slaughterhouse Ventilation shutdown Blood sport Badger-baiting Bear-baiting Boar-baiting Bull-baiting Donkey-baiting Duck-baiting Hog-baiting Human-baiting Hyena-baiting Lion-baiting Monkey-baiting Rat-baiting Wolf-baiting Cruelty Pest control ( Varmint hunting ) Sacrifice Working animal Animal testing History Alternatives Regulations Countries banning non-human ape experimentation Non-human primates Cosmetics Model organism Vivisection ( Anti-vivisection movement ) Organizations Huntingdon Life Sciences Nafovanny Green Scare ( Operation Backfire ) Animal welfare Abandoned pets Captivity Euthanasia ( insects ) Farmed insects Killing of animals Live food Pain Amphibians Cephalopods Crustaceans Fish Invertebrates Laboratory animals Sports Fishing Bait Commercial Farming Recreational Wild animals Culling Farming Hunting Techniques Coursing Spotlighting Trail hunting Trapping Treeing Trophy hunting Upland hunting Animals Alligators Bats Bears Birds Bison Boar Raccoons Deer Dolphins Foxes Hares Jackals Lions Mink Petrels Quail Rabbit Rooks Seals Squirrels Tigers Turtles Waterfowl Wild birds Whales Wolves Management Predation problem Suffering Trade Primates Ivory Welfare Cases Brown Dog affair Cambridge University primates McLibel case Monkey selfie copyright dispute Pit of despair SHAC Silver Spring monkeys University of California, Riverside 1985 laboratory raid Unnecessary Fuss War of the currents Studies Animal ethics Anthrozoology Critical animal studies Ethology Vegan studies Methodologies Direct Action Everywhere Hunt sabotage Observances World Animal Day World Day for Farmed Animals World Day for the End of Speciesism World Day for Laboratory Animals World Day for the End of Fishing World Vegan Day World Vegetarian Day Advocates (academics, writers, activists) Academics and writers Contemporary Carol J. Adams Aysha Akhtar Kristin Andrews Marc Bekoff Steven Best Paola Cavalieri Stephen R. L. Clark Alasdair Cochrane J. M. Coetzee Alice Crary David DeGrazia Daniel Dombrowski Sue Donaldson Josephine Donovan Joan Dunayer Mylan Engel Catia Faria Lawrence Finsen Michael W. Fox Gary L. Francione Robert Garner Valéry Giroux Lori Gruen John Hadley Oscar Horta Christine Korsgaard Dale Jamieson Kyle Johannsen Melanie Joy Hilda Kean Will Kymlicka Renan Larue Thomas Lepeltier Andrew Linzey Clair Linzey Dan Lyons David Nibert Martha Nussbaum Clare Palmer Charles Patterson David Pearce Jessica Pierce Evelyn Pluhar Mark Rowlands Richard D. Ryder Steve F. Sapontzis Jeff Sebo Jérôme Segal Peter Singer Gary Steiner Cass Sunstein David Sztybel Michael Tye Tatjana Višak Paul Waldau Corey Lee Wrenn Historical Tom Beauchamp Jeremy Bentham David Renaud Boullier Stephen St. C. Bostock Brigid Brophy Peter Buchan Mona Caird Priscilla Cohn Sherry Colb Henry Crowe Herman Daggett Richard Dean Wilhelm Dietler William Hamilton Drummond Edward Payson Evans T. Forster John Galsworthy Thomas G. Gentry V. A. Holmes-Gore Arthur Helps John Hildrop John Zephaniah Holwell Francis Hutcheson Soame Jenyns Marie Jungius Karl Christian Friedrich Krause John Lawrence Charles R. Magel Jean Meslier Mary Midgley J. Howard Moore José Ferrater Mora Robert Morris Leonard Nelson Edward Nicholson Siobhan O'Sullivan John Oswald Rod Preece Humphrey Primatt James Rachels Tom Regan Joseph Ritson Nathaniel Peabody Rogers Bernard Rollin Henry Stephens Salt Arthur Schopenhauer Laurids Smith John Styles Thomas Tryon Gary Varner Johann Friedrich Ludwig Volckmann Mary Anne Warren Adam Gottlieb Weigen Johann Heinrich Winckler Steven M. Wise Jon Wynne-Tyson Voltaire Thomas Young Activists Contemporary James Aspey Greg Avery Matt Ball Martin Balluch Carole Baskin Barbi Twins Brigitte Bardot Gene Baur Yves Bonnardel Joey Carbstrong Aymeric Caron Jake Conroy Rod Coronado Karen Dawn Chris DeRose John Feldmann Bruce Friedrich Juliet Gellatley Tal Gilboa Antoine Goetschel Mark Gold Brigitte Gothière Alex Hershaft Wayne Hsiung Charlotte Laws Ronnie Lee Howard Lyman Evanna Lynch Bill Maher Keith Mann Jim Mason Dan Mathews Joaquin Phoenix Jo-Anne McArthur Luísa Mell Virginia McKenna Morrissey Ingrid Newkirk Heather Nicholson Jack Norris Ric O'Barry David Olivier Alex Pacheco Craig Rosebraugh Jasmin Singer Kim Stallwood Lynda Stoner Marianne Thieme Darren Thurston Christine Townend Wendy Turner-Webster Jerry Vlasak Louise Wallis Ed Winters Gary Yourofsky That Vegan Teacher Historical Cleveland Amory Henry B. Amos Bob Barker Ernest Bell William Brown Edith Carrington Joseph Collinson Frances Power Cobbe Joan Court Karen Davis Royal Dixon Muriel Dowding Elizabeth Farians Emarel Freshel André Géraud Lewis Gompertz James Granger Barry Horne Marie Huot Lizzy Lind af Hageby Jessie Mackay Alfred Mansfield Mitchell J. Isaac Pengelly Norm Phelps Jill Phipps Maud Ingersoll Probasco Hans Ruesch Magnus Schwantje Nell Shipman Henry Spira Joseph Stratton Andrew Tyler Gretchen Wyler Movement (groups, parties) Groups Contemporary American Anti-Vivisection Society Animal Aid Animal Ethics Animal Justice Animal Justice Project Animal Legal Defense Fund Animal Liberation Animal Liberation Front Animal Liberation Press Office Animal Liberation Victoria Animal Rights Militia Animal Rising AnimaNaturalis Anti-Vivisection Coalition Anonymous for the Voiceless Beauty Without Cruelty Born Free Foundation Centre for Animals and Social Justice Chinese Animal Protection Network Cruelty Free International Direct Action Everywhere Doctors Against Animal Experiments Equanimal Every Animal Farm Animal Rights Movement Faunalytics Great Ape Project Hunt Saboteurs Association In Defense of Animals Korea Animal Rights Advocates L214 Last Chance for Animals Massachusetts Animal Rights Coalition Mercy for Animals Oxford Centre for Animal Ethics People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Revolutionary Cells – Animal Liberation Brigade Rise for Animals Sentience Politics Uncaged Campaigns United Activists for Animal Rights United Poultry Concerns UPF-Centre for Animal Ethics Viva!

Voice for Animals Humane Society Voiceless Historical Canadian Anti-Vivisection Society Humanitarian League (1891–1919) Millennium Guild Order of the Golden Age Oxford Group Parties Animal Justice Party (Australia) Animal Politics EU (Europe) Animal Protection Party of Canada (Canada) Animal Justice Party of Finland (Finland) Animals' Party (Sweden) Animalist Movement (Italy) Animalist Party with the Environment (Spain) DierAnimal (Belgium) Human Environment Animal Protection Party (Germany) Italian Animalist Party (Italy) Party for the Animals (Netherlands) People Animals Nature (Portugal) V-Partei³ (Germany) Activism Animal Rights National Conference Media (books, films, periodicals, albums) Books On Abstinence from Eating Animals (3rd century) A Reasonable Plea for the Animal Creation (1746) A System of Moral Philosophy, in Three Books (1755) The Cry of Nature (1791) An Essay on Humanity to Animals (1798) An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty (1802) Moral Inquiries on the Situation of Man and of Brutes (1824) The Rights of Animals (1838) The Ethics of Diet (1883) A Plea for Vegetarianism and Other Essays (1886) Animals' Rights: Considered in Relation to Social Progress (1892) Evolutional Ethics and Animal Psychology (1897) Better-World Philosophy (1899) The Logic of Vegetarianism (1899) The Universal Kinship (1906) The New Ethics (1907) Animals, Men and Morals (1971) Animal Liberation (1975) The Case for Animal Rights (1983) Morals, Reason, and Animals (1987) Zoos and Animal Rights (1993) Animals, Property, and the Law (1995) The Lives of Animals (1999) Eternal Treblinka (2001) Do Animals Have Rights?

(2005) Striking at the Roots (2008) An American Trilogy (2009) An Introduction to Animals and Political Theory (2010) Animal Rights Without Liberation (2012) Political Animals and Animal Politics (2014) Animal (De)liberation (2016) Beating Hearts: Abortion and Animal Rights (2016) Sentientist Politics (2018) Wild Animal Ethics (2020) Animal Ethics in the Wild (2022) Making a Stand for Animals (2022) Animal Rights Law (2023) The Moral Circle (2025) Films The Animals Film (1981) A Cow at My Table (1998) Shores of Silence (2000) The Witness (2000) Meet Your Meat (2002) Legally Blonde 2 (2003) The Meatrix (2003) Peaceable Kingdom (2004) Earthlings (2005) Behind the Mask (2006) Your Mommy Kills Animals (2007) Food, Inc.

(2009) The Cove (2009) Peaceable Kingdom: The Journey Home (2009) Forks Over Knives (2011) Vegucated (2011) An Apology to Elephants (2013) Speciesism: The Movie (2013) The Ghosts in Our Machine (2013) Unlocking the Cage (2016) Land of Hope and Glory (2017) Carnage (2017) Okja (2017) Dominion (2018) Seaspiracy (2021) Periodicals Journals Animal Sentience Between the Species Cahiers antispécistes Etica & Animali Journal of Animal Ethics Relations. Beyond Anthropocentrism The Animals' Defender Magazines Arkangel Bite Back Muutoksen kevät No Compromise Satya Albums Animal Liberation (1987) Tame Yourself (1991) Manifesto (2008) Salvation of Innocents (2014) Onward to Freedom (2014) Fairs and exhibitions Holocaust on your Plate (2003) Category ( 138 ) v t e Ethology Branches Animal cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal sexual behaviour Animal welfare science Anthrozoology Bee learning and communication Behavioural ecology Behavioral endocrinology Behavioural genetics Breed Cognitive ethology Comfort behaviour Grooming Comparative psychology Emotion in animals Ethogram Evolutionary neuroscience Feeding Hover Human ethology Instinct Learning Neuroethology Pain in animals Philosophical ethology Sociobiology Species-typical behavior Stereotypy Structures Hive Honeycomb Nest Instinct Swarm Tool use by non-humans Zoosemiotics Zoomusicology Ethologists Patrick Bateson Marc Bekoff Donald Broom John B. Calhoun Charles Darwin Marian Dawkins Richard Dawkins Irenäus Eibl-Eibesfeldt Dian Fossey Karl von Frisch Jane Goodall Heini Hediger Julian Huxley Konrad Lorenz Desmond Morris Thomas Sebeok William Homan Thorpe Nikolaas Tinbergen Jakob von Uexküll Wolfgang Wickler E. O. Wilson Solly Zuckerman Societies Association for the Study of Animal Behaviour International Society for Applied Ethology Journals Animal Behaviour Animal Cognition Animal Welfare Behavioral Ecology Behaviour Category v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Universals Development Attachment Bonding Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / Mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects Academic disciplines Behavioral / evolutionary economics Behavioral epigenetics / genetics Affective / behavioral / cognitive / evolutionary neuroscience Biocultural anthropology Biolinguistics Biological psychiatry Cognitive ethology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Comparative psychology Cross-cultural psychology Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary medicine Functional psychology Neuropsychology Philosophy of mind Population genetics Primatology Sociobiology Research topics Animal / comparative cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Animal navigation Animal training Animal-made art Cognitive bias Emotion g factor in non-humans Great ape language Human–animal communication Number sense Primate cognition Theory of mind Tool use Cultural evolution Evolutionary epistemology Missing heritability problem Unit of selection Coevolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Fisher's principle Group selection Hologenome theory Lamarckism / acquired characteristics Population Punctuated equilibrium Recent human evolution Species Species complex Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Trivers–Willard hypothesis Theoretical positions Cultural selection theory Determinism / indeterminism Biological determinism Connectionism Cultural determinism Environmental determinism Nature versus nurture Psychological nativism Social constructionism Social determinism Standard social science model Functionalism Memetics Multilineal evolution Neo-Darwinism Neoevolutionism Sociocultural evolution Unilineal evolution Evolutionary psychologists Evolutionary psychology Psychology portal Evolutionary biology portal v t e Great ape language Languages taught to non-human apes American Sign Language Yerkish Non-human apes taught simple languages Bonobos Kanzi Nyota Panbanisha Chimpanzees Lana Loulis Lucy Nim Chimpsky Sarah Viki Washoe Gorillas Koko Michael Ndume Orangutans Azy Chantek Researchers Francine Patterson Sue Savage-Rumbaugh Maurice K. Temerlin Roger Fouts Tetsuro Matsuzawa William M. Fields Research centers Chimpanzee and Human Communication Institute Elgin Center Iowa Primate Learning Sanctuary The Gorilla Foundation Media Koko: A Talking Gorilla (1978 film) The Mind of an Ape (1983 book) Next of Kin (1997 book) Project Nim (2011 film) Related Animal language Animal communication Primate cognition Animal cognition Human–animal communication NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐dmz2x
Cached time: 20250815034615
Cache expiry: 3600
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.074 seconds
Real time usage: 2.296 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11671/1000000
Revision size: 125586/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 696110/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2053/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 25/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 774479/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.265/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6467932/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1829.528      1 -total
 65.55% 1199.281      1 Template:Reflist
 34.11%  624.139    112 Template:Cite_journal
 23.21%  424.706     67 Template:Cite_book
  9.21%  168.574     17 Template:Navbox
  4.43%   81.106      1 Template:Animal_cognition
  4.29%   78.483      1 Template:Short_description
  3.82%   69.813     14 Template:Cite_web
  3.68%   67.312      1 Template:Animal_rights
  3.49%   63.906      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:425938:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815034615 and revision id 1304001822. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Animal_cognition&oldid=1304001822 " Categories : Animal cognition Animal intelligence Animal rights Animal welfare Human–animal communication Zoology Animals Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 10:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Animal cognition 26 languages Add topic

