Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Rise and decline 1.2 Scientific atmosphere 2 Modifications and architecture 3 Zij-i Sultani 4 Museum 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Ulugh Beg Observatory 35 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Башҡортса Беларуская Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Հայերեն हिन्दी Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Magyar مصرى 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Português Qaraqalpaqsha Русский Саха тыла Slovenščina Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 39°40′30″N 67°0′18″E ﻿ / ﻿ 39.67500°N 67.00500°E ﻿ / 39.67500; 67.00500 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Observatory in Samarkand, Uzbekistan Ulugh Beg Observatory in 2023 A model of Ulug Beg obsrevatory in the Uzbek National Muzeum - the central partition hosted the huge sextant .

The trench with the lower section of the meridian arc. In Ulugh Beg's time, these walls were lined with polished marble . It was part of huge sextant .

The Ulugh Beg Observatory is an observatory in modern day Samarkand , Uzbekistan , which was built in the 1420s by the Timurid astronomer Ulugh Beg . This school of astronomy was constructed under the Timurid Empire , and was the last of its kind from the Islamic Medieval period [ 1 ] .

Islamic astronomers who worked at the observatory include Jamshid al-Kashi , Ali Qushji , and Ulugh Beg himself. The observatory was destroyed in 1449 and rediscovered in 1908.

History [ edit ] Rise and decline [ edit ] Ulugh Beg , founder of the observatory, in a contemporary Timurid painting (1425-1450) Ulugh Beg , the son of Shah Rukh and grandson of Amir Timur , became the ruler of Samarkand in the 15th century AD. Ulugh Beg was very skilled in mathematics and astronomy. He taught many important astronomers, including Ali Qushji .

Many historians have tried to accurately identify the dates of the events that occurred during the Samarkand or Ulugh Beg Observatory.

[ 2 ] The differences in interpreting dates and citations of historical sources have caused inaccuracies and neglection of some events during this time.

In Jamshid al-Kashi 's letters to Ulugh Beg's father, you can see Ulugh Beg's visit to the Maragha Observatory had an effect on Ulugh Beg.

[ 3 ] This could have affected Ulugh Beg's reason for his transformation of the city of Samarkand and his mathematical orientation. Other matters such as, political, economic, military, social, and even commercial reasons could have played a role in the building of Ulugh Beg's observatory.

[ 3 ] Another reason of starting his own observatory could have been because of Ulugh Beg's differences in observations of those with al-Sūfī .

The foundation for Ulugh Beg Observatory was laid in the earlier half of the 1420s (823 AH). Although the year of its completion is still debated, the observatory was completed around 1428 AD (831 AH).

[ 2 ] Many Old Persian texts reference the Samarkand Observatory and Ulugh Beg.

He invited skillful mathematicians and astronomers to help build this observatory and also a madrassa in Samarkand. Among those he invited were Ghīyāth al-Dīn Jamshid al-Kashi, Mu’in al-Din al-Kashi, Salah al-Din Qadi Zada Rumi, and Ali Qushiji.

[ 2 ] Over 60 mathematicians and astronomers were invited to the observatory.

Jamshīd al-Kāshī was appointed as the first director of the observatory. After al-Kashi's death Qadi Zada became the director of the observatory. After the death of Qadi Zada, Qushji led the observatory as the last and final director. The Samarkand Observatory was a place for astronomers and mathematician to work together in finding new discoveries.

Ulugh Beg's observatory was built according to the plans of the Maragha observatory, which was designed by Nasir al-din al-Tusi.

[ 4 ] Ulugh Beg's observatory included the largest quadrant principle device. The building was not tall but was allowed a maximal size for the arc of the circle. This device was carefully oriented, and the arc was scaled very accurately. This device was very versatile. It could accurately measure the sun from the horizon, the altitude of a star and other planets. The duration of the year, period of planets, and eclipses were measured by this device. Ulugh Beg's measurements of planets closely relate to today's measurement, showing us the phenomenal accuracy of the device.

[ 4 ] Today, the foundations and the buried part of the marble quadrant are all that are visible of the original vestiges of the Ulugh Beg Observatory. Much of the decline of the observatory has been attributed to Ulugh Beg's assassination by his son, Abd al Latif, around 1449 (852 AH).

[ 5 ] Ulugh Beg's death caused chaos within the observatory. The observatory was destroyed and dozens of talented astronomers and mathematicians were driven away.

[ 5 ] In 1908, the Russian archaeologist Vassily Vyatkin uncovered the remains of the observatory.

[ 5 ] Scientific atmosphere [ edit ] Jamshid Al-Kashi , a 15th-century astronomer and mathematician, is known to have relocated to Samarkand to interact with the scientific processes taking place there. Having received an invitation from Ulugh Beg, Al-Kashi left his native land of Kashan in north central Iran and went to Samarkand. A letter that Al-Kashi wrote to his father during his stay in Samarkand has been translated by Kennedy (1960) and Sayılı (1960). This letter, written in Persian, has shaped the modern view of Samarkand activities substantially despite its lack of information about scientific activities that were taking place at the observatory. However, a new letter written by Al-Kashi to his father has been found in Iran, and the translation of this letter by Bagheri sheds more light on the scientific atmosphere of Samarkand in particular and reduces the ambiguity of certain elements in the first letter by virtue of their overlapping parts.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Ulugh Beg Madrasah was an important centre of astronomical study in Central Asia In the letter, Al-Kashi describes a problem about astrology that he discussed with his colleagues. The translation, ‘‘[Let us suppose that] the Sun is, e.g., in 10 degrees of Aquarius, with a certain altitude, and the ascendent of time is a certain degree [of the ecliptic]; then [the ascendent of the time when] its [i.e., the Sun's] altitude [is the maximum altitude of the ecliptic at that moment] is a quadrant [in advance of the Sun's position], i.e., in 10 degrees (20) of Taurus", reveals that perhaps Samarkand's scientific atmosphere was more geared towards astrology than previously believed given Krisciunas's paper on the “Legacy of Ulugh Beg” where astrology has an extremely limited discussion.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Astrology, only mentioned once in passing in Krisciunas's paper on the scientific atmosphere of Ulugh Beg, was perhaps a more integrated element of the scientific discourse in the Samarkand world given the new, aforementioned letter.

[ 8 ] [ 10 ] Per the letter of Al-Kashi to his father, an innovation was created with Ulugh Beg. The Fakhrı sextant, stood on top of a rock into which some of it was carved, so the edifice would not be tall given the soft bricks of the area. Al-Kashi compares this to Maragha, saying that the sextant is positioned higher there but also notes the flat roof present in Samarkand should facilitate scientific improvement given the fact that “instruments may be placed on it”.

[ 8 ] This information, about the sextants in Maragha is contradictory to other sources that state there were no sextants at Maragha.

[ 11 ] [ 6 ] This contradiction was revealed by the translation.

Moreover, the scientific atmosphere of Samarkand was one of general isolation because Al-Kashi describes the stout adherence to Ptolemy's methodologies and lack of awareness for happenings of the Maragha observatory. The lack of awareness and strict adherence to prior methods by Ulugh Beg himself reveals the perhaps provincial nature of their studies. However, this perceived closed-mindedness was alleviated by the increasing diversity of scientists and students that were invited to the observatory. An evaluation of the errors made in Ptolemy at Samarkand by Shevchenko further confirms the effects of Samarkand's initial isolated nature.

[ 12 ] According to Bageri's translation of Al-Kashi's letter, a lot of teaching was going on there strictly from memory by teachers who had learned from astronomers in Herat.

[ 8 ] Moreover, at the time Al-Kashi wrote the letter, three of the teachers were well versed in Islamic jurisprudence: Qazızada, Maulana Muhammad Khanı, and Maulana Abu’l-Fath.

[ 8 ] The letter also states that Ulugh Beg did not show up to teach class often.

[ 8 ] Maulana Abu’l-Fath stated that he was intellectually underneath Maulana Muhammad Khanı, who was only occasionally present in the court meetings or observatory meetings, and Qazızada, who was always practicing his craft. "To do them justice, [I must admit that] (30) when there is a discussion in their meeting, I dare not intervene, all the more so because His Majesty knows this art well and [therefore] one cannot impudently claim competence." [ 8 ] Ulugh Beg fostered an environment with some of the best astronomers of the time, and they all observed and calculated the positions of thousands of stars.

[ 13 ] Ulugh Beg's main work was the Zij-i Sultani .

[ 14 ] Written in 1437, this work was in Persian, and it was also greatly influenced by Nasir al-Din Tusi .

[ 7 ] One of the scientists with whom Jamshid al-Kashi would study was Yusuf H. allaj, who had prior experiences in Herat, Egypt, Syria, Anatolia, and adjacent regions.

[ 8 ] Yusuf H. allaj was the son of Maulana H. allaj’, who also resided in Samarkand at the same time Al-Kashi was there.

[ 8 ] Ulugh Beg was surrounded with other Islamic astronomers such as Ali Qushji .

It is also noted that music was studied and taught at the observatory. Prosody, music and mathematics seemed to foster the curiosities of the scientists there at the time. However, in the letter by Al-Kashi, he noted that despite his curiosity about music and math, he was urged to focus on his tasks at hand.

[ 8 ] Modifications and architecture [ edit ] The architecture of Ulugh Beg's observatory was different from the others built around that time. Ulugh Beg needed a skilled architect to help him, so he contacted Qazizada-I Rumi and asked him to find an experienced and skilled architects. Qazizada-I Rumi recommended Kashani, a mathematician and architect. The observatory was modeled after the Maragheh observatory which thought of by Hulagu Khan and Mangu Khan, they hired Nasir al-Din al-Tusi so head the construction of the observatory.

[ 15 ] Ulugh Beg's observatory was built on a hill 21 meters above the ground. The observatory has a cylindrical-shaped building with a diameter of 46 meters and a height of 30 to 33 meters, the sextant was in the middle of this cylinder. The building was made of brick, which was readily available but not particularly stable. The radius of the sextant was 40.04 meters, [ 16 ] which made it the largest astronomical instrument in the world at the time. With this radius, the height of the building would have to have been so large that it could have caused it to be too tall, potentially falling in on itself. This problem was solved by constructing part of the sextant underground, in a ditch roughly 2 meters wide.

[ 16 ] This allowed the size of the sextant to be maintained without the height being dangerously tall.

[ 17 ] The Fakhrı sextant had 70.2 cm divisions which represented one degree. There were also marks every 11.7mm to show one minute and 1mm marks that represented five seconds. These markings turned out to be extremely accurate, matching up closely to the calculations found today.

[ 16 ] The observatory was made up of three stories, the first story was for the staff to live in. All observations were made from the second and third stories, which had many arches to look through. The roof of the observatory was flat, allowing instruments to be utilized on top of the building.

[ 17 ] The entrance of the observatory has been modified several times in recent years. This is primarily for aesthetic reasons and is not to improve the observatory's accuracy.

Zij-i Sultani [ edit ] Main article: Zij-i Sultani Zīj-i Sultānī ( Persian : زیجِ سلطانی ) is a Zij astronomical table and star catalogue that was published by Ulugh Beg in 1437.

A Zij is an astronomical table that is made up of numerical tables and explanations that allow astronomers to compute any problems they encounter. It should provide enough information that they can understand how to measure time and how to compute the positions of planets and stars. The Zij may also contain the proof for the math and theories contained in the tables.

[ 18 ] Ulugh Beg's Zij-I Sultani was published in 1437, it was written in Persian, and listed around 1,000 stars. It follows Ptolemaic work and does not suggest any changes in the planetary model. It has also been called Zij-I Ulugh Beg, Zij-I Jadid-I Sultani, and Zaij-I Gurgani.

[ 18 ] It is thought that he may have been influenced to create his Zij by Nasir al-Din Tusi , who had written 150 books.

[ 19 ] Ulugh Beg's star catalog was the first to have been published since the Almagest written by Ptolemy . The Zij-I Sultani includes the stars explained in the Almagest, but has more accurate numbers accompanying them. The primary instrument used to obtain the information in the Zij-I Sultani came from Ulugh Beg's observatory quadrant. He did not work alone, he was assisted by his students and other Muslim astronomers including Jamshid al-Kashi and Ali Qushji .

[ 18 ] It took 17 years to compile the full list of stars, they began in 1420 when Ulugh Beg was 26 years old and they finished in 1437. One of the most significant parts of the Zij-I Sultani is Ulugh Beg's sine table. The table is 18 pages long and has values of sine to nine decimal places for every degree from zero to 87, it also contains the value of sine to 11 decimal places from 87 to 90 degrees. The Zij was influential and was continuously used until the 19th century and hundreds of copies of the original Persian manuscript exist around the world. It has also been translated into many languages including Arabic, Turkish, and Hebrew. Commentaries by known astronomers like Quishji have also been made.

[ 18 ] Ulugh Beg determined the length of the tropical year as 365 d 5 h 49 m 15 s , which has an error of +25 s , making it more accurate than Nicolaus Copernicus ' estimate which had an error of +30 s . Ulugh Beg also determined the Earth's axial tilt as 23;30,17 degrees in sexagesimal notation, which in decimal notation converts to 23.5047 degrees.

[ 20 ] Museum [ edit ] Ulugh Beg Observatory Museum The Ulug Beg Observatory Museum was built in 1970 to commemorate Ulugh Beg. The museum contains reproductions of the Arabic manuscripts Ulug Beg's star charts, the Zij-i Sultani , and of important European printed editions of Ulugh Beg's work. It also contains astrolabes and other instruments as well as a miniature reconstruction of the observatory itself.

References [ edit ] ^ Zotti, Georg; Mozaffari, S. Mohammad (2020).

"New Light on the Main Instrument of the Samarqand Observatory" .

Journal for the History of Astronomy .

51 (3): 255– 271.

doi : 10.1177/0021828620943986 .

ISSN 0021-8286 – via Sage Journals.

^ a b c Yazdi, Hamid-Reza Giahi (2015). "Chronology of the Events of the Samarquand "Observatory and School" Based on some Old Persian Texts: a Revision".

Suhayl : 145– 65.

^ a b Fazliogglu, İhsan.

"The Samarqand Mathematical-Astronomical School: A Basis for Ottoman Philosophy and Science" (PDF) .

^ a b Juhel, Alain (2007). "Prince of Samarqand Stars".

The Mathematical Tourist : 44– 50.

^ a b c "Ulugh Beg Observatory" .

Atlas Obscura . Retrieved 2019-11-22 .

^ a b A Letter of Jamshıd al-Kashı to His Father: Scientific Research and Personalities at a Fifteenth Century Court, Orientalia 29 (1960), 191–213; reprinted in Edward S. Kennedy, colleagues and former students, Studies in the Islamic Exact Sciences, Beirut: American University, 1983, pp. 722–44.).

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ; Missing or empty |title= ( help ) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu; Feza Günergun (2000).

Science in Islamic Civilisation: Proceedings of the International Symposia: "Science Institutions in Islamic Civilisation", & "Science and Technology in the Turkish and Islamic World" . IRCICA.

ISBN 9789290630951 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Bagheri, Mohammad (1997).

"A Newly Found Letter of Al-Kashı on Scientific Life in Samarkand" (PDF) .

Historia Mathematica .

24 (HM962145): 241– 56.

doi : 10.1006/hmat.1996.2145 . Retrieved 23 November 2019 .

^ "The Legacy of Ulugh Beg | Central Asian Monuments | Edited by H. B. Paksoy | Carrie Books" . Archived from the original on 2019-05-19 . Retrieved 2019-11-25 .

^ Kulikovskij, P. G. (October 1981). "Book Review: Science at Samarkand: From the History of Science in the Time of Ulugh Beg".

Journal for the History of Astronomy .

12 (3): 211– 12.

doi : 10.1177/002182868101200309 .

ISSN 0021-8286 .

S2CID 220912908 .

^ Aydın Sayılı, Ulugˇ Bey ve Semerkanddeki Iˆlim Faalıyeti Hakkında Gıyasu¨ddin-i Kaˆs¸ı’nin Mektubu: Ghiyath al-Dın al-Kashı’s Letter on Ulugh Bey and the Scientific Activity in Samarqand, Ankara: Tu¨rk Tarih Kurumu Basımevi, 1960.) ( Edward S. Kennedy.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ; Missing or empty |title= ( help ) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Shevchenko, M. (1990-05-01). "An Analysis of Errors in the Star Catalogues of Ptolemy and Ulugh Beg".

Journal for the History of Astronomy .

21 (2): 187– 201.

Bibcode : 1990JHA....21..187S .

doi : 10.1177/002182869002100202 .

ISSN 0021-8286 .

S2CID 117758864 .

^ Luminet, Jean-Pierre (2018). "Ulugh Beg, Prince of Stars".

arXiv : 1804.08352 .

Bibcode : 2018arXiv180408352L .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Fazlioglu, I. : The Samarqand Mathematical-Astronomical School: A Basis for Ottoman Philosophy and Science, Journal for the History of Arabic Science 14, 22–23, 2008.

^ Safiai, Mohd Hafiz; Ibrahim, Ibnor Azli (2016), "Tracing the History of Astrolabe Inventions Across Civilisations", Islamic Perspectives on Science and Technology , Springer Singapore, pp.

373– 82, doi : 10.1007/978-981-287-778-9_26 , ISBN 978-981-287-777-2 ^ a b c Hughes, Mary (2016-08-25).

"Ulugh Beg" .

Perth Observatory . Retrieved 2023-12-06 .

^ a b Taheri, Jafar (2009), "Mathematical Knowledge of Architecture in the Works of Kâshânî", Nexus Network Journal , Birkhäuser Basel, pp.

77– 88, doi : 10.1007/978-3-7643-8974-1_7 , ISBN 978-3-7643-8973-4 , S2CID 120471241 ^ a b c d Kennedy, E. S. (1956). "A Survey of Islamic Astronomical Tables".

Transactions of the American Philosophical Society .

46 (2): 123– 77.

doi : 10.2307/1005726 .

hdl : 2027/mdp.39076006359272 .

ISSN 0065-9746 .

JSTOR 1005726 .

^ Cavin, Jerry D. (2011-08-20), "Ulugh Beg", The Amateur Astronomer's Guide to the Deep-Sky Catalogs , Patrick Moore's Practical Astronomy Series, Springer New York, pp.

51– 54, doi : 10.1007/978-1-4614-0656-3_3 , ISBN 978-1-4614-0655-6 ^ L.P.E.A. Sédillot, Prolégomènes des tables astronomiques d'OlougBeg: Traduction et commentaire (Paris: Firmin Didot Frères, 1853), pp.

87 & 253 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ulugh Beg Observatory .

Ulughbek and his Observatory in Samarkand Fazlıoğlu İ. (2008).

"The Samarqand Mathematical-Astronomical School: A Basis for Ottoman Philosophy and Science" (PDF) .

Journal for the History of Arabic Science .

14 : 3– 68. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-02-22.

39°40′30″N 67°0′18″E ﻿ / ﻿ 39.67500°N 67.00500°E ﻿ / 39.67500; 67.00500 v t e Astronomy in the medieval Islamic world Astronomers by century 8th Ahmad Nahavandi Al-Fadl ibn Naubakht Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Mashallah ibn Athari Yaʿqūb ibn Ṭāriq 9th Abu Ali al-Khayyat Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Said Gorgani Al-Farghani Al-Kindi Al-Mahani Abu Hanifa Dinawari Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf Al-Marwazi Ali ibn Isa al-Asturlabi Banū Mūsā brothers Iranshahri Khalid ibn Abd al‐Malik al‐Marwarrudhi Al-Khwarizmi Sahl ibn Bishr Thābit ibn Qurra Yahya ibn Abi Mansur 10th al-Sufi Ibn Al-Adami al-Khojandi al-Khazin al-Qūhī Abu al-Wafa Ahmad ibn Yusuf al-Battani Al-Qabisi Ibn al-A'lam Al-Nayrizi Al-Saghani Aṣ-Ṣaidanānī Ibn Yunus Ibrahim ibn Sinan Ma Yize al-Sijzi Al-ʻIjliyyah Nastulus Abolfadl Harawi Haseb-i Tabari al-Majriti Abu al-Hasan al-Ahwazi 11th Abu Nasr Mansur al-Biruni Ali ibn Ridwan Al-Zarqālī Ibn al-Samh Alhazen Avicenna Ibn al-Saffar Kushyar Gilani Said al-Andalusi Ibrahim ibn Said al-Sahli Ibn Mu'adh al-Jayyani Al-Isfizari Ali ibn Khalaf 12th Al-Bitruji Avempace Ibn Tufail Al-Kharaqī Al-Khazini Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Abu al-Salt Averroes Ibn al-Kammad Jabir ibn Aflah Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi 13th Ibn al-Banna' al-Marrakushi Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili Jamal ad-Din Alam al-Din al-Hanafi Najm al‐Din al‐Misri Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Zakariya al-Qazwini al-Urdi al-Abhari Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr al‐Farisi Abu Ali al-Hasan al-Marrakushi Ibn Ishaq al-Tunisi Ibn al‐Raqqam Al-Ashraf Umar II Fakhr al-Din al-Akhlati 14th Ibn al-Shatir Al-Khalili Ibn Shuayb al-Battiwi Abū al‐ʿUqūl Al-Wabkanawi Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri al-Jadiri Sadr al-Shari'a al-Asghar Fathullah Shirazi 15th Ali Kuşçu Abd al‐Wajid Jamshid al-Kashi Kadızade Rumi Ulugh Beg Sibt al-Maridini Ibn al-Majdi al-Wafa'i al-Kubunani 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Wafa'i 16th Al-Birjandi al-Khafri Baha' al-din al-'Amili Piri Reis Takiyüddin 17th Yang Guangxian Ehmedê Xanî Al Achsasi al Mouakket Muhammad al-Rudani Topics Works Arabic star names Islamic calendar Aja'ib al-Makhluqat Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Tabula Rogeriana The Book of Healing The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries Zij Alfonsine tables Huihui Lifa Book of Fixed Stars Toledan Tables Zij-i Ilkhani Zij-i Sultani Sullam al-sama' Instruments Alidade Analog computer Aperture Armillary sphere Astrolabe Astronomical clock Celestial globe Compass Compass rose Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorium Globe Graph paper Mural instrument Navigational astrolabe Octant Planisphere Quadrant Sextant Shadow square Sundial Schema for horizontal sundials Triquetrum Concepts Almucantar Apogee Astrology Astrophysics Axial tilt Azimuth Celestial mechanics Celestial spheres Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Galaxy Geocentrism Gravitational energy Gravity Heliocentrism Inertia Islamic cosmology Moonlight Multiverse Muwaqqit Obliquity Parallax Precession Qibla Salah times Specific gravity Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Sunlight Supernova Temporal finitism Trepidation Triangulation Tusi couple Universe Institutions Al-Azhar University House of Knowledge House of Wisdom University of al-Qarawiyyin Observatories Constantinople (Taqi al-Din) Maragheh Samarkand (Ulugh Beg) Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Indian astronomy Influenced Byzantine science Chinese astronomy Medieval European science Indian astronomy v t e Tourist attractions in Uzbekistan World Heritage Sites Listed Cold Winter Deserts of Turan Historic Centre of Bukhara Historic Centre of Shakhrisyabz Itchan Kala Samarkand – Crossroads of Cultures Silk Roads: Zarafshan-Karakum Corridor Western Tien-Shan Tentative list Abdulkhan Bandi Dam Akhsikath Ak Astana-Baba Ancient Termiz Ancient Pap Andijan Arab-Ata Mausoleum Bahoutdin Architectural Complex Boysun Chashma-Ayub Mausoleum Chor-Bakr Desert Castles of Ancient Khorezm Hisor Mountains Historic Centre of Qoqon Kanka Khanbandi Khazarasp Minaret in Vobkent Mir-Sayid Bakhrom Mausoleum Nurota Mountains Poykent Rabati Malik Caravanserai Sarmishsay petroglyphs Shahrukhiya Sheikh Mukhtar-Vali Complex Shokhimardon Mountains Silk Road Sites in Uzbekistan Silk Roads: Fergana-Syrdarya Corridor Siypantosh Rock Paintings Tashkent makhallas Tashkent Modernist Architecture Varakhsha Zomin Mountains Zarautsoy Rock Paintings Cultural Archaeological sites Afrasiyab Akchakhan-Kala Akhsikath Ancient Pap Ayaz-Kala Balalyk Tepe Burchmullo Dalverzin Tepe Fayaz Tepe Guldursun-Kala Hazorasp Itchan Kala Kafir-kala Kara Tepe Khalchayan Khiva Koi Krylgan Kala Kyzyl-Kala Obi-Rakhmat Grotto Orlat plaques Poykent Sarmishsay Shahrukhiya Siypantosh Rock Paintings Tavka Kurgan Toprak-Kala Zarautsoy Rock Paintings Complexes Bahoutdin Architectural Complex Lyab-i Hauz Po-i-Kalyan Registan Forts Ark of Bukhara Urda fortress Madrasas Kukeldash Madrasa The Madrasa of Abulkosim Madrasah of Nadir Divan-begi Mir-i Arab Madrasa Sher-Dor Madrasah Tilya-Kori Madrasah Ulugh Beg Madrasa Saroyi Tash Madrasah Mausoleums Ak Astana-Baba Chashma-Ayub Mausoleum Chor-Bakr Gur-e-Amir Mausoleum of Sheikh Zaynudin Mir-Sayid Bakhrom Mausoleum Saif ed-Din Bokharzi & Bayan-Quli Khan Mausoleums Samanid Mausoleum Sayyed Bahram Mausoleum Shah-i-Zinda Sheikh Mukhtar-Vali Complex Sheihantaur Sultan Saodat Museums Afrasiab Museum of Samarkand Amir Timur Museum Archaeological Museum of Termez Art Gallery of Uzbekistan Bukhara State Architectural Art Museum-Preserve Memorial house museum of Tamara Khanum Museum Afshona Museum of Arts of Uzbekistan The Museum of Communication History in Uzbekistan Museum of Geology The Museum of Health Care of Uzbekistan Museum of Olympic Glory Museum of Victims of Political Repression in Tashkent Nukus Museum of Art Shahrisabz Museum of History and Material Culture State Museum of Culture History of Uzbekistan (Samarkand) State Museum of History of Uzbekistan State Museum of Nature of Uzbekistan Tashkent Museum of Railway Techniques Tashkent Planetarium Tashkent Polytechnical Museum The Alisher Navoi State Museum of Literature Ulugh Beg Observatory Places of worship Ak Mosque Baland Mosque Bibi-Khanym Mosque Bolo Haouz Mosque Cathedral of the Dormition of the Mother of God Chor Minor Dzhuma Mosque Kalân Mosque Kalyan minaret Khonakhan Mosque Magok-i-Attari Mosque Magok-i-Kurpa Mosque Mosque of Mir Sayyid Ali Hamadani Sacred Heart Cathedral St. John the Baptist Church Theaters Navoi Theater Peoples' Friendship Palace Others Khanaka of Nadir Divan-begi Monument to Nizami Ganjavi in Tashkent Mustaqillik Maydoni Rabati Malik Siyob Bazaar Square of Martyrs in Uzbekistan Tashkent Tower Natural Lakes Aydar Lake Lake Charvak National parks Chatkalskiy State Nature Reserve Zaamin National Park Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ulugh_Beg_Observatory&oldid=1302834747 " Categories : Buildings and structures completed in 1429 Astronomical observatories in Uzbekistan Science and technology in Uzbekistan Museums in Uzbekistan Buildings and structures in Samarkand Astronomical observatories of the medieval Islamic world Timurid architecture Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical CS1 errors: missing title CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Persian-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 18:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ulugh Beg Observatory 35 languages Add topic

