Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 United States Toggle United States subsection 1.1 "Baseline Road" 2 Canada Toggle Canada subsection 2.1 Ontario 3 See also 4 External links 5 References Toggle the table of contents Baseline (surveying) 2 languages Deutsch Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Line between two points on the Earth's surface This article is about the usage in surveying. For other uses, see Baseline (disambiguation) .

"Standard parallel" redirects here; not to be confused with Standard parallel (map projections) .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( June 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This BLM map depicts the principal meridians and baselines used in the survey of the United States.

In surveying , a baseline is generally a line between two points on the Earth's surface and the direction and/or distance between them.

In a triangulation network, at least one distance between two stations needs to be measured to calculate the size of the triangles by trigonometry .

In relative Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) surveying, a baseline is the line between two GNSS receivers to determine the 3D coordinate difference.

United States [ edit ] In the United States Public Land Survey System , a baseline is specifically the principal east-west line (i.e., a parallel ) upon which all rectangular surveys in a defined area are based. The baseline meets its corresponding principal meridian (north-south line) at the point of origin, or initial point , for the land survey. For example, the baseline for Nebraska and Kansas is shared as the border for both states, at the 40th parallel north .

More specifically a baseline may be the line that divides a survey township between north and south.

"Baseline Road" [ edit ] Many communities in the United States have roads that run along survey baselines, many of which are named to reflect that fact. Some examples: In Little Rock , Arkansas , Baseline Road follows the baseline used by surveyors of the Louisiana Purchase .

In Colorado , Baseline Road in Boulder marks the 40th parallel , or the western extension of the Kansas-Nebraska boundary, which is also the boundary between Adams and Weld counties.

In Arizona , the baseline near the Phoenix metro area is marked by Baseline Road .

In Southern California, from Highland to San Dimas, the baseline is marked by Baseline Road .

In Michigan, the baseline for the Michigan Survey forms the boundary between the second and third tiers of counties and in many portions, discontinuous segments of road along the baseline are known as " Baseline Road ." 8 Mile Road in the Detroit area runs along the Michigan Baseline and was formerly known as "Baseline Road." Baseline Road in Hillsboro, Oregon, generally follows the Willamette Baseline which intersects the Willamette Meridian at the Willamette Stone State Park .

Base Line Road in Roseville California , was known as "Base Line Road" until the City (incorrectly at the time) named the section of road within their incorporated area, "Baseline Road".  They petitioned the County for a name change, and the spelling was changed effective 11/20/17 [ 1 ] Canada [ edit ] In Canadian land surveying, a base line is one of the many principal east-west lines that correspond to four tiers of townships (two tiers north and two south). The base lines are about 24 miles (39 km) apart, with the first base line at the 49th parallel , the western Canada–US border . It is, therefore equivalent to the standard parallel in the US system.

Ontario [ edit ] In Ontario, a baseline forms a straight line parallel a geographical feature (mostly a lake, especially Lake Ontario or Lake Erie ) that serves as a reference line for surveying a grid of property lots. The result of this surveying is the concession road and sideline system in use today.

Many prominent Ontario baselines lie on the surveyed boundaries of land treaties signed with First Nations peoples. For example, several baselines in Waterloo Region and Brant County (including Wilmot Line , Brant-Oxford Road , and Indian Line ) follow the borders of the Haldimant Tract land grant to the Six Nations confederacy , [ 2 ] leading to the patchwork road and lot network, surveyed parallel to the western edge of the tract, which can be seen in this area to this day.

Jones Baseline which runs through Wellington County and Halton Region follows the original survey route marked by Augustus Jones after the Between the Lakes Purchase in 1792.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Public Land Survey System (United States) List of principal and guide meridians and base lines of the United States Dominion Land Survey (Canada) Survey township Decumanus Maximus Principal meridian Borden Base Line Braak Base Line (Germany) External links [ edit ] The Principal Meridian Project (US) Resources page of the U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management History of the Rectangular Survey System Note: This is a large file, approximately 46MB. Searchable PDF prepared by the author, C. A. White.

References [ edit ] ^ County of Placer (2017-11-22).

"ROAD NAME SPELLING UPDATE-BASE LINE ROAD TO BASELINE ROAD" .

County of Placer .

^ "Haldimand Tract" .

Grand River Country . Retrieved 8 July 2019 .

^ Stephen Thorning (1 Feb 1995).

"Augustus Jones determined present-day county boundaries" .

Wellington Advertiser . Retrieved 8 July 2019 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Baseline_(surveying)&oldid=1276585593 " Category : Surveying and geodesy markers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from June 2010 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 19 February 2025, at 18:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Baseline (surveying) 2 languages Add topic

