Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Notable Czech SF writers 2 Film 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Czech speculative fiction 2 languages Română Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Czech science fiction and fantasy ) Science fiction and fantasy of Czechia Science fiction and fantasy in the Czech Republic has a long and varied history.  From 1918, when Czechoslovakia became independent, until 1939, when Nazi Germany invaded it, Czech literature enjoyed one of its high points.

[ 1 ] Czech writers developed their works as aesthetic pieces rather than as platforms demanding independence for the Czech people.  The best-known and most important of SF writers was Karel Čapek , whose play R.U.R. (Rossum's Universal Robots) (printed 1920, premiered January 1921), introduced and made popular the frequently used international word robot .

[ 2 ] Čapek is perhaps best known as a science fiction author , who wrote before science fiction became established as a separate genre . He can be considered one of the founders of classical, non-hardcore European science fiction, a type which focuses on possible future (or alternative) social and human evolution on Earth, rather than technically advanced stories of space travel. However, it is best to classify him with Aldous Huxley and George Orwell as a mainstream literary figure who used science-fiction motifs.  Many of his works discuss ethical and other aspects of revolutionary inventions and processes that were already anticipated in the first half of 20th century. These include mass production , atomic weapons , and non-human intelligent beings such as robots, space-faring gypsies or intelligent salamanders (in his War with the Newts ).

Josef Nesvadba , writing since the late 1950s, quickly became the best-known Czech SF author of the post-war generation, [ 3 ] being translated into English and German, even though he moved from the SF proper after his first 3 story collections to the fringes of fantastic genre and mainstream.

The modern era of Czech SF began in late 1970s, coinciding and soon interacting with the founding of science fiction fandom in 1979.

Notable Czech SF writers [ edit ] Karel Čapek Josef Nesvadba Ludvík Souček Ondřej Neff Jiří Kulhánek Miroslav Žamboch Jaroslav Velinský Lucie Lukačovičová Petra Neomillnerová Film [ edit ] Skeleton on Horseback ( Bílá nemoc ) (1937) Krakatit (1948) Journey to the Beginning of Time (1955) The Fabulous World of Jules Verne (1958) Man in Outer Space (1961) The Cybernetic Grandma (1962) Voyage to the End of the Universe ( Ikarie XB-1 , 1963) Who Wants to Kill Jessie?

(1966) Late August at the Hotel Ozone (1967) I Killed Einstein, Gentlemen (1969) On the Comet (1970) You Are a Widow, Sir (1971) Což takhle dát si špenát (1977) Tomorrow I'll Wake Up and Scald Myself with Tea (1977) Talíře nad Velkým Malíkovem (1977) Visitors from the Galaxy (1981) The Mysterious Castle in the Carpathians (1981) Srdečný pozdrav ze zeměkoule (1983) Wolf's Hole (1987) The Witches Cave (1989) A Sound of Thunder (2005) Snowpiercer (2013) Lajka (2017) Restore Point (2023) Notes [ edit ] ^ The history of Czech literature Archived 2008-09-27 at the Wayback Machine - Czech republic official website ^ Karel named his brother Josef Čapek as the true inventor of the word.

^ "The Josef Nesvadba Page: Biography and Bibliography" . Archived from the original on 2007-09-27 . Retrieved 2007-08-27 .

References [ edit ] Ivan Adamovič , Jaroslav Olša, Jr.

: Czech and Slovak SF, in The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction (2nd ed 1993) Adamovič, Ivan (ed).

Encyklopedie fantastického filmu . Praha: Cinema, 1994. 224 pp.

ISBN 80-901675-3-5 (Encyclopedia of fantastic film, with résumé in English) “SF in the Czech Republic,” Locus , 31 (6): 38. December 1993.

Science Fiction, a Global Community: Czech Republic, Locus , 32 (4): 42.  April 1994.

Adamovič, Ivan. SF in the Czech Republic, Locus , 33 (1): 45-46. July 1994.

Adamovič, Ivan. SF in the Czech Republic, Locus , 34 (4): 38-9.  April 1995.

Hauser(ová), Eva . “Science Fiction in the Czech Republic and the Former Czechoslovakia: The Pleasures and the Disappointments of the New Cosmopolitanism”, Science Fiction Studies #63, Vol 21 (Issue 2): 133-140. July 1994.

Overview of late 1990s Czech science fiction in a Usenet post Robots and Vigilante Vampires : Radio Prague brief interview on the current state of the genre, 22 June 2008 v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal v t e Speculative fiction in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Czech_speculative_fiction&oldid=1301368248 " Categories : Czech speculative fiction Czech science fiction Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 12:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Czech speculative fiction 2 languages Add topic

