Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Performance history 3 Roles 4 Synopsis 5 Recordings 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Mother (opera) 5 languages Català Čeština Español Français Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For the Russian opera Mat , see Tikhon Khrennikov .

You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Czech .

(March 2024) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Czech Wikipedia article at [[:cs:Matka (opera)]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|cs|Matka (opera)}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Mother , op. 35 ( Czech : Matka ) is a quarter-tone opera in ten scenes by the Czech composer Alois Hába . It was completed in 1929 to the composer's own libretto; its plot is drawn from the author's native Valašsko . The opera is written in prose.

Background [ edit ] After Hába successfully resolved instrumental and theoretical problems with the quarter-tone system in the 1920s, he started to compose fully in that style. His work is bi-chromatic and in some folklore-inspired scenes and recitative parts of the score Hába approached to the intonational diction of the folk dialect. In spite of the folklore atmosphere of the work, its music is very independent and entirely original. The opera is strongly connected to Moravian ethnic traditions and takes advantage of local dialect and music .

Daniel Albright describes it as, "a remarkable work: slightly in awe of its own daring, in that Hába seemed more fascinated by the quarter-tone scale themselves than by any melody that might be construed from them, and yet resolute in refusing to employ the small intervals in the expected way, as a resource for denoting pain and disorientation [ expressionism ]," instead Hába intended the opera as a peasant comedy in the tradition of Smetana 's Bartered Bride (1866).

[ 1 ] Performance history [ edit ] The work was premiered at the Gärtnerplatztheater in Munich , Germany in May 1931.

Roles [ edit ] Křen, the farmer (tenor) Maruša, his wife (soprano) Francka, one of Křen's children by his first marriage (soprano) Nanka, one of Křen's children by his first marriage (mezzo-soprano) Maruša, one of Křen's children by his first marriage (soprano) Francek, one of Křen's children by his first marriage (tenor) Vincek (baritone) Maruša's father (bass) Sister-in-law (soprano) Brother-in-law (bass) Priest (tenor) First lachrymose old woman (soprano) Second lachrymose old woman (soprano) Third lachrymose old woman (contralto) Fourth lachrymose old woman (contralto) First neighbor (tenor) Second neighbor (bass) Best man (tenor) Bridesmaid (soprano) Chorus of Village People Synopsis [ edit ] In a poor part of Moravia there lives a small farmer Křen with his large family. Hard working Křen toiled his first wife to death and married again. His second wife, Maruša, isn't satisfied with the passion of her husband. With her maternal love, she eventually succeeds in breaking the defiant nature of her husband, accustomed to physical work and satisfaction. She gives birth to children and brings them up according to her idea of "God's will". She becomes the fellow-observer of life, forever regenerating itself, in the similar way as the course of life is conceived by the Christian view of the world.

Recordings [ edit ] Alois Hába: Matka (Mother) (Sung in Czech). Prague National Theatre Chorus and Orchestra, cond. Jiří Jirouš, quarter-tone piano Jiří Pokorný, recorded 1964, published 1965, two 12-inch gramophone records , Supraphon 10 8258-2 612 References [ edit ] ^ Albright, Daniel. 2004.

Modernism and Music: An Anthology of Sources , p.243. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-01267-0 .

Further reading [ edit ] Vysloužil, Jiří: Hudební slovník pro každého II.

Vizovice: Lípa, 1998.

ISBN 80-86093-23-9 .

External links [ edit ] "Alois Haba – Czech Contemporary Composer" , Czech music information centre "Chronological List of Works of Alois Hába" , TonalSoft: Encyclopaedia of Tuning v t e Microtonal music Composers Richard Barrett Béla Bartók Easley Blackwood Jr.

Heinz Bohlen Julián Carrillo Franklin Cox Mildred Couper John Eaton Brian Ferneyhough Michael Finnissy Bjørn Fongaard Alois Hába Christiaan Huygens Charles Ives Ben Johnston György Ligeti Stu Mackenzie Claus-Steffen Mahnkopf Joel Mandelbaum Joe Maneri Roger Redgate John Schneider Sevish Ezra Sims Nicola Vicentino Claude Vivier Elaine Walker Ivan Wyschnegradsky La Monte Young Inventors Glenn Branca Wendy Carlos Ivor Darreg Adriaan Fokker Lou Harrison Yuri Landman Harry Partch Tui St. George Tucker Nicola Vicentino Tunings and scales Non-octave- repeating scales Alpha scale Beta scale Gamma scale Delta scale Lambda scale (Bohlen–Pierce scale) Equal temperament 15 17 19 22 23 24 31 34 41 53 58 72 96 Just intonation Harry Partch's 43-tone scale Double diatonic Concepts and techniques Limit Otonality and Utonality Semitone Sonido 13 Xenharmonicity Tonality diamond Groups and publications Boston Microtonal Society Genesis of a Music Huygens-Fokker Foundation Compositions Beauty in the Beast quarter tone pieces just pieces Mother Sonata for Microtonal Piano Suite for Microtonal Piano Twelve Microtonal Etudes for Electronic Music Media Flying Microtonal Banana K.G.

L.W.

Other topics Enharmonic keyboard Generalized keyboard Modernism (music) Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Other MusicBrainz work Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mother_(opera)&oldid=1291115519 " Categories : 1929 operas Czech-language operas Microtonal compositions Operas Operas by Alois Hába Hidden categories: Culture articles needing translation from Czech Wikipedia Articles containing Czech-language text This page was last edited on 19 May 2025, at 05:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mother (opera) 5 languages Add topic

