Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Legend 2 Origin 3 Other Chinese creation myths 4 In Bouyei culture 5 Worship 6 See also 7 References 8 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 8.1 Additional sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Pangu 39 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Bikol Central Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Español فارسی Français 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chinese mythical figure This article is about Chinese mythology. For the iOS jailbreaking tool, see Pangu Team . For other uses, see Pangu (disambiguation) .

Pangu Portrait of Pangu from Sancai Tuhui Traditional Chinese 盤古 Simplified Chinese 盘古 Literal meaning Ancient dome [ citation needed ] Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Pángǔ Wade–Giles P'an 2 -ku 3 IPA [pʰǎn.kù] Yue: Cantonese Jyutping pun 4 gu 2 Southern Min Hokkien POJ Phoân-kó͘ Middle Chinese Middle Chinese /buɑn kuo X / Part of a series on Chinese folk religion Concepts Tian — Shangdi Qi Shen Ling Xian ling Yinyang Hundun Mingyun Yuanfen Baoying Wu Theory Chinese theology Chinese gods and immortals Chinese mythology Chinese astrology Chinese zodiac Chinese creation myth Chinese spiritual world concepts Model humanity: Xian Zhenren Wen and wu Practices Fenxiang Jingxiang Feng shui Miaohui Wu shamanism Jitong mediumship Precious scrolls Institutions and temples Associations of good-doing Lineage associations or churches Chinese temple Ancestral shrine Chinese Folk Temples' Association Festivals Qingming Zhongyuan Zhongqiu Jiuhuangye Qixi Duanwu Nian Internal traditions Major cultural forms Chinese ancestral religion Chinese communal deity religion Chinese food therapy Chinese geomancy Chinese mother goddess worship Northeast China folk religion Traditional Chinese medicine Qigong Main philosophical traditions: Confucianism ( state rites ) Taoism Three teachings Other schools ( Mohism ) Ritual traditions: Folk ritual masters' orders Jitong mediumship Nuo folk religion Chinese shamanism Devotional traditions: Mazuism Ong Yah worship Zhenkong, "Void of Truth".

Salvation churches and sects : De teaching Jiugongdao Luo teaching Maitreya teachings Tiandi teachings Tianxian miaodao Xia teaching Xiantiandao Yiguandao Zaili teaching Confucian churches and sects: Holy Confucian Church Indonesian Confucian Church Universal Church of the Way and its Virtue Phoenix churches Xuanyuanism Taigu school Related religions and movements Benzhuism Bimoism Bon Dongbaism Han Buddhism Miao folk religion Vietnamese folk religion Qiang folk religion Yao folk religion Zhuang folk religion House church (China) Religion portal v t e Pangu or Pan Gu [ 1 ] (also sometimes spelled Peng Gu and P’an-ku) [ 2 ] [ 3 ] ( Chinese : 盤古 , PAN -koo ) is a primordial being and creation figure in Chinese mythology and in Taoism . According to legend, Pangu separated heaven and earth , and his body later became geographic features such as mountains and flowing water.

Legend [ edit ] The first writer to record the myth of Pangu is thought to be Xu Zheng during the Three Kingdoms period. However, his name was found in a tomb predating the Three Kingdoms period.

[ 4 ] In the beginning, there was nothing and the universe was in a featureless, formless primordial state . This primordial state coalesced into a cosmic egg over the course of about 18,000 years. Within it, the perfectly opposed principles of yin and yang became balanced and Pangu emerged (or woke up) from the egg. Pangu inside the cosmic egg symbolizes Taiji .

[ 5 ] Pangu is usually depicted as a primitive, hairy giant with horns on his head. Pangu began creating the world: he separated yin from yang with a swing of his giant axe , creating the earth (murky yin ) and the sky (clear yang ).

[ 6 ] To keep them separated, Pangu stood between them and pushed up the sky. With each day, the sky grew ten feet (3.0 meters) higher, the earth ten feet thicker, and Pangu ten feet taller.

In some versions of the story, Pangu is aided in this task by the Four Holy Beasts ( 四靈獸 ), the Turtle , the Qilin , the Phoenix , and the Dragon . There are many different legends about Pangu's  creation of the world, with some saying that this task took 18,000 years, while others say that he lived for millions of years.

[ 2 ] One version of the legend says that at the centre of Pangu's celestial realm stood a mountain he called Seven Treasures Peak, which is where he built a home called Jade Terrace of the Mysterious City. Far away resided the Jade Maiden, who he saw wandering through the great limitless one day. He invited her to come live with him at Seven Treasures Peak. Their union gave birth to the Emperor of the East and Empress of the West as well as the Celestial Lord, who then created the Terrestrial Lord, who in turn gave birth to the Lord of Humanity.

[ 7 ] Other versions of the legend state that he had no direct offspring and that instead his body transformed after his death into all forms of life in the universe.

[ 3 ] When Pangu died, his breath became the wind, mist and clouds; his voice, thunder; his left eye, the Sun; his right eye, the Moon; his head, the mountains and extremes of the world; his blood, rivers; his muscles, fertile land; his facial hair, the stars and Milky Way; his fur, bushes and forests; his bones, valuable minerals; his bone marrow, precious jewels; his sweat, rain; and the fleas on his fur carried by the wind became animals.

[ 8 ] In other versions of the story, his body turned into the mountains.

[ 6 ] Origin [ edit ] Three main elements describe the origin of the Pangu myth. The first is that the story is indigenous and was developed or transmitted through time to Xu Zheng . Senior Scholar Wei Juxian states that the Pangu story is derived from stories during the Western Zhou dynasty. He cites the story of Zhong ( 重 ) and Li ( 黎 ) in the "Chuyu ( 楚語 )" section of the ancient classics Guoyu . In it, King Zhao of Chu asked Guanshefu ( 觀射父 ) a question: "What did the ancient classic "Zhou Shu ( 周書 )" mean by the sentence that Zhong and Li caused the heaven and earth to disconnect from each other?" The "Zhou Shu" sentence he refers to is about an earlier person, Lü Xing ( 呂刑 ), who converses with King Mu of Zhou . King Mu's reign is much earlier and dates to about 1001 to 946 BC. In their conversation, they discuss a "disconnection" between heaven and earth.

Derk Bodde linked the myth to the ancestral mythologies of the Miao people and Yao people in southern China.

[ 9 ] This is how Professor Qin Naichang ( 覃乃昌 ), head of the Guangxi Institute for Nationality Studies , [ 10 ] reconstructs the true creation myth preceding the myth of Pangu. Note that it is not actually a creation myth: A brother and his sister became the only survivors of the prehistoric Deluge by crouching in a gourd that floated on water. The two got married afterwards, and a mass of flesh in the shape of a whetstone was born. They chopped it and the pieces turned into large crowds of people, who began to reproduce again. The couple were named 'Pan' and 'Gou' in the Zhuang ethnic language, which stand for whetstone and gourd respectively.

19th-century comparative religion scholar Paul Carus writes: P'an-Gu: The basic idea of the yih philosophy was so convincing that it almost obliterated the Taoist cosmology of P'an-Ku who is said to have chiseled the world out of the rocks of eternity. Though the legend is not held in high honor by the literati, it contains some features of interest which have not as yet been pointed out and deserve at least an incidental comment.

P'an-Gu is written in two ways: one means in literal translations, "basin ancient", the other "basin solid". Both are homophones, i.e., they are pronounced the same way; and the former may be preferred as the original and correct spelling. Obviously the name means "aboriginal abyss," or in the terser German, Urgrund, and we have reason to believe it to be a translation of the Babylonian Tiamat , "the Deep." The Chinese legend tells us that P'an-Ku's bones changed to rocks; his flesh to earth; his marrow, teeth and nails to metals; his hair to herbs and trees; his veins to rivers; his breath to wind; and his four limbs became pillars marking the four corners of the world , which is a Chinese version not only of the Norse myth of the Giant Ymir , but also of the Babylonian story of Tiamat.

Illustrations of P'an-Ku represent him in the company of supernatural animals that symbolize old age or immortality, viz., the tortoise and the crane; sometimes also the dragon, the emblem of power, and the phoenix, the emblem of bliss.

When the earth had thus been shaped from the body of P'an-Ku, we are told that three great rivers successively governed the world: first the celestial, then the terrestrial, and finally the human sovereign. They were followed by Yung-Ch'eng and Sui -Jen (i.e., fire-man) the later being the Chinese Prometheus , who brought the fire down from heaven and taught man its various uses.

The Prometheus myth is not indigenous to Greece, where it received the artistically classical form under which it is best known to us. The name, which by an ingenious afterthought is explained as "the fore thinker," is originally the Sanskrit pramantha and means "twirler" or "fire-stick," being the rod of hard wood which produced fire by rapid rotation in a piece of soft wood.

We cannot deny that the myth must have been known also in Mesopotamia, the main center of civilization between India and Greece, and it becomes probable that the figure Sui-Jen has been derived from the same prototype as the Greek Prometheus.

[ 11 ] The missionary and translator James Legge discusses Pangu: P'an-ku is spoken of by the common people as "the first man, who opened up heaven and earth." It has been said to me in "pidgin" English that "he is all the same your Adam"; and in Taoist picture books I have seen him as a shaggy, dwarfish, Hercules, developing from a bear rather than an ape, and wielding an immense hammer and chisel with which he is breaking the chaotic rocks.

[ 12 ] Other Chinese creation myths [ edit ] See also: Chinese creation myth The Pangu myth appears to have been preceded in ancient Chinese literature by the existence of Shangdi or Taiyi (of the Taiyi Shengshui ). Other Chinese myths, such as those of Nüwa and the Jade Emperor , try to explain how people were created and do not necessarily explain the creation of the world. There are many variations of these myths.

[ 13 ] In Bouyei culture [ edit ] According to Bouyei mythology, after Pangu became an expert in rice farming after creating the world, he married the daughter of the Dragon King , and their union gave rise to the Buyei people. This is celebrated by the Bouyei people on June 6, as a holiday.

[ 14 ] The daughter of the Dragon King and Pangu had a son named Xinheng ( 新横 ). When Xinheng disrespected his mother, she returned to heaven and never came down, despite the repeated pleas of her husband and son. Pangu was forced to remarry and eventually died on the sixth day of the sixth month of the lunar calendar .

Xinheng's stepmother treated him badly and almost killed him. When Xinheng threatened to destroy her rice harvest, she realized her mistake. She made peace with him and they went on to pay their respects to Pangu annually on the sixth day of the sixth month of the lunar calendar. This day became an important traditional Buyei holiday for ancestral worship .

[ 15 ] This legend of creation is one of the main characteristics that distinguishes the Buyei from the Zhuang .

Worship [ edit ] Pangu is worshipped at a number of shrines in contemporary China , usually with Taoist symbols, such as the Bagua .

The Pangu King Temple ( 盘古皇庙 ; 盤古皇廟 ) built in 1809 is located in Guangdong Province , northwest Huadu District (west of G106 / north of S118), north of Shiling Town at the foot of the Pangu King Mountain.

[ 16 ] The Huadu District is located north of Guangzhou to the west of the Baiyun International Airport .

The term for the primordial supercontinent Pangaea is translated as Pangu in Chinese, referring to the creation myth.

See also [ edit ] Cosmic Man Tiamat (Ancient Mesopotamian) Nu (mythology) (Ancient Egyptian) Chaos (cosmogony) (Ancient Greek) Ymir (Norse) Gaia Kingu Korean creation narratives Manu (Hinduism) Panguite , meteoritic mineral named after Pangu, discovered in 2012 Protoplast (religion) Purusha Thần Trụ Trời Tlaltecuhtli Yama References [ edit ] ^ Kwang-Chih Chang (13 March 1999). "China on the Eve of the Historical Period". In Loewe, Michael ; Shaughnessy, Edward L.

(eds.).

The Cambridge History of Ancient China: From the Origins of Civilization to 221 BC . Cambridge histories online. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 68.

ISBN 9780521470308 . Retrieved 7 December 2024 .

[...] the other cosmogonic myths - the two versions of Pan Gu's creation and the story of the ten suns - could be at least as early as the time of the Three Dynasties, or, as I believe to be more likely, even earlier still, going well back into the Upper Palaeolithic period.

^ a b Wong, Eva (2007).

Tales of the dancing dragon: stories of the Tao (1st ed.). Boston : [New York]: Shambhala ; Distributed in the United States by Random House. p. 11.

ISBN 978-1-59030-523-2 .

OCLC 123284916 .

^ a b "Pangu" .

Mythopedia . Retrieved 2025-04-26 .

^ 盘古探源：让你了解古老神秘的盘古 . Archived from the original on 2013-12-18.

^ Robinet, I.; Wissing, Paula A. (May 1990). "The Place and Meaning of the Notion of Taiji in Taoist Sources Prior to the Ming Dynasty".

History of Religions .

29 (4): 373– 411.

^ a b Dell, Christopher (2012).

Mythology: The Complete Guide to our Imagined Worlds . New York: Thames & Hudson . p. 90.

ISBN 978-0-500-51615-7 .

^ Wong, Eva (2007).

Tales of the dancing dragon: stories of the Tao (1st ed.). Boston : [New York]: Shambhala ; Distributed in the United States by Random House. pp.

11– 13.

ISBN 978-1-59030-523-2 .

OCLC 123284916 .

^ "Pan Gu | Myths & Versions | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2025-04-26 .

^ Bodde, Derk (1961). "Myths of Ancient China". In Kramer, Samuel Noah (ed.).

Mythologies of the Ancient World . Anchor. p. 383.

^ "Expert Says Chinese Myth on Origin of Universe Originated in South" .

arabic.china.org.cn . Archived from the original on 2019-11-07 . Retrieved 2025-01-06 .

^ Carus, Paul (1974) [1907]. "Chinese Occultism".

Chinese Astrology, Early Chinese Occultism .

Note: in 1907 the Wade-Giles system of transliteration was used.

^ Legge, James (1881).

The Religions of China: Confucianism and Tâoism Described and Compared with Christianity . C. Scribner. p. 168.

^ 盤古神話探源 (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-11-11.

^ Beijing Review . Beijing Review. 1988.

^ 布依族 .

big5.www.gov.cn .

^ "Pangu King Temple Park Travel Guide" . Archived from the original on 2012-02-18 . Retrieved 2009-02-24 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Xu Zheng ( 徐整 ; Xú Zhěng ; 220–265 AD), in the book Three Five Historic Records ( 三五歷紀 ; Sānwǔ Lìjì ), is the first to mention Pangu in the story "Pangu Separates the Sky from the Earth".

Ge Hong ( 葛洪 ; Gě Hóng ; 284–364 AD), in the book Master of Preserving Simplicity Inner Writings ( 抱朴子内篇 ; Baopuzi Neipian ), describes Pangu (Werner, E.T.C.

Myths and Legends of China (1922)).

Ouyang Xun ( 歐陽詢 ; Ōuyáng Xún ; 557–641 AD), in the book Classified Anthology of Literary Works ( 藝文類聚 ; Yiwen Leiju ), also refers to Pangu.

Carus, Paul (1852–1919) in the book Chinese Astrology, Early Chinese Occultism (1974) based on an earlier book by the same author Chinese Thought . This book was a bestseller (1907).

Additional sources [ edit ] Mentions of Pangu as Adam from The Papers of Charles Daniel Tenney External links [ edit ] Media related to Pangu at Wikimedia Commons v t e Chinese mythology Overview topics Creation myth Godly world concepts Astrology Dragons Shenmo fiction Gods and immortals Tian Pangu Ghosts Chinese folk religion Major personages Gods and immortals Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors Eight Immortals Youchao Shennong Yellow Emperor Yan Emperor Chiyou Chang'e Hou Yi Kuafu Mythological creatures Four Symbols Black Tortoise Azure Dragon White Tiger Vermilion Bird Yellow Dragon Four Holy Beasts Qilin Fenghuang Yinglong Spirit turtle Bixi Huli jing (Fox spirit) Nine-tailed fox Chinese guardian lions Pixiu (Bixie) Nian Horses Feilian Xiezhi Wuzhiqi Yeren Four Perils ( Four Evildoers ) Peng (mythology) Nine-headed Bird Tianma more...

Places Buzhou Diyu Eight Pillars Gate of the Ghosts Fusang Jade Mountain Kunlun Mountain Longmen Moving Sands Penglai Red River Weak River Youdu Items Gu Peaches of Immortality Xirang Literary works Classic of Mountains and Seas Shi Yi Ji Bowuzhi Liexian Zhuan Shenxian Zhuan Shenyi Jing Hainei shizhou ji The Peach Blossom Spring The Four Journeys Investiture of the Gods The Sorcerer's Revolt Strange Tales from a Chinese Studio Journey to the West In Search of the Supernatural What the Master Would Not Discuss Heavenly Questions ( Chu Ci ) Huainanzi Records of the Grand Historian Notes of the Thatched Abode of Close Observations Other folk tales Legend of the White Snake Dong Yong and the Seventh Fairy The Cowherd and the Weaver Girl The Magic Lotus Lantern Mulian Rescues His Mother NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐76c8w
Cached time: 20250817043743
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.710 seconds
Real time usage: 0.827 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3187/1000000
Revision size: 17500/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 93401/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1334/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 80327/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.479/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15699856/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  720.513      1 -total
 31.51%  227.039      1 Template:Reflist
 25.65%  184.834      1 Template:Infobox_Chinese
 20.36%  146.695      7 Template:Cite_book
 11.16%   80.374      1 Template:Chinese_folk_religion
 10.90%   78.547      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.16%   58.815      1 Template:Short_description
  5.63%   40.567      1 Template:Chinese_mythology
  5.41%   38.989      7 Template:Cite_web
  5.41%   38.974      1 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:312489:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043743 and revision id 1303341261. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pangu&oldid=1303341261 " Categories : Chinese giants Chinese gods Creator gods Mythological first humans Death of deities Hidden categories: CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2024 Pages with plain IPA Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 12:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pangu 39 languages Add topic

