Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Development 3 Biblical interpretation 4 Critiques 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Footnotes 6.2 Bibliography 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Womanist theology 4 languages فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia African-American religious conceptual framework Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Part of a series on African Americans History Periods Timeline Atlantic slave trade Abolitionism in the United States Slavery in the colonial history of the US Revolutionary War Antebellum period Slavery and military history during the Civil War Reconstruction era Politicians Juneteenth Civil rights movement (1865–1896) Jim Crow era (1896–1954) Civil rights movement (1954–1968) Black power movement Post–civil rights era Aspects Agriculture history Black Belt in the American South Business history Military history Treatment of the enslaved Migrations Great Migration Second Great Migration New Great Migration Culture Lifeways Dance Family structure Film Folktales Music Musical theater Names Neighborhoods Newspapers Soul food Schools Education during the slave period in the US Education of freed people during the Civil War History of African-American education , after the Civil War Historically black colleges and universities Fraternities Academic study Studies Art Literature Celebrations Martin Luther King Jr. Day Black History Month Juneteenth Kwanzaa Economic class African-American businesses Middle class Upper class Billionaires Symbols and ideas African-American beauty Black is beautiful Black pride African-American hair Good hair Stepping " Lift Every Voice and Sing " Self-determination Religion Institutions Black church Theologies Black theology Womanist theology Non-Christian groups Hoodoo Black Hebrew Israelites African-American Jews African-American Muslims Nation of Islam Louisiana Voodoo African Diaspora Religions Politics Organizations Congressional Black Caucus Joint Center National Black Caucus of State Legislators National Conference of Black Mayors Ideologies Afrocentrism Anarchism Back-to-Africa movement Black power Capitalism Conservatism Garveyism Leftism Liberalism Nationalism Pan-Africanism Patriotism Populism Radicalism Socialism Civic/economic groups Organizations Association for the Study of African American Life and History Black conductors NAACP National Black Chamber of Commerce National Council of Negro Women National Pan-Hellenic Council National Urban League TransAfrica UNCF Sports Negro league baseball Athletic associations and conferences Central (CIAA) HBCU (HBCUAC) Mid-Eastern (MEAC) Southern (SIAC) Southwestern (SWAC) Sub-communities Multiethnic African-American Jews Afro-Puerto Ricans Alabama Creole people Black Indians Black Seminoles Mascogos Blaxicans Brass Ankles Creoles of color Dominickers Freedmen Great Dismal Swamp maroons Louisiana Creoles Melungeon Carmel Redbone Specific ancestries Americo-Liberians Creek Freedmen Gullah Merikins Nova Scotians Samaná Americans Sierra Leone Creole Sexual orientation LGBT community Dialects and languages English dialects African-American English African-American Vernacular English Liberian English Samaná English Tutnese Languages and other dialects Gullah Afro-Seminole Creole Negro Dutch Black American Sign Language Population US states Alabama Arkansas California Florida Georgia Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Louisiana Maryland Mississippi Nebraska New York North Carolina Ohio Oklahoma Oregon South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Virginia US cities Black mecca List of neighborhoods Atlanta Baltimore Boston Chicago Dallas-Fort Worth Davenport Detroit Houston Jacksonville Kentucky Lexington Los Angeles New York City Omaha Philadelphia San Antonio San Francisco Historic places District of Columbia Florida Georgia Mississippi Missouri Omaha, Nebraska North Carolina South Carolina Texas West Virginia Population count US states and territories US metropolitan areas US cities US communities Places by plurality of population Diaspora Africa Canada France Ghana Israel Liberia Nova Scotia Sierra Leone Prejudice Racism Black genocide Race and ethnicity in the US census Racism against Black Americans Reparations for slavery School segregation in the US Unarmed African Americans killed by police officers Stereotypes and media depictions Blackface Criminal stereotypes Hollywood Magical Negro Minstrel show United States portal Category Index v t e Womanist theology is a methodological approach to theology which centers the experience and perspectives of Black women , particularly African-American women .  The first generation of womanist theologians and ethicists began writing in the mid to late 1980s, and the field has since expanded significantly. The term has its roots in Alice Walker 's writings on womanism . "Womanist theology" was first used in an article in 1987 by Delores S. Williams .

[ 1 ] Within Christian theological discourse, Womanist theology emerged as a corrective to early feminist theology written by white feminists that did not address the impact of race on women's lives, or take into account the realities faced by Black women within the United States. Similarly, womanist theologians highlighted the ways in which Black theology , written predominantly by male theologians, failed to consider the perspectives and insights of Black women.

[ 2 ] Scholars who espouse womanist theology are not monolithic nor do they adopt each aspect of Walker's definition.

[ 1 ] Rather, these scholars often find kinship in their anti-sexist, antiracist and anti-classist commitments to feminist and liberation theologies.

Etymology [ edit ] The term womanish was commonly used in Black daily language by mothers to describe adolescent daughters who act outrageous and grown-up, in contrast to girlish .

Womanist was then developed in 1983 by black writer and activist Alice Walker in her collection of essays, In Search of Our Mothers' Gardens: Womanist Prose . In this text, she makes the point that "A Womanist is to feminist as purple is to lavender." [ 3 ] Hence, while womanist referred primarily to African-American women, it was also for women in general. Walker's works would have significant impact on later womanist theologians.

[ 4 ] Development [ edit ] Womanist theology developed in dialogue with black theology, particularly as articulated by James Hal Cone . Cone broke new ground in 1969 with the publication of A Black Theology of Liberation, which sought to make sense out of theology from black experience in America. In the book , Cone argued that "God is black" and that God identifies with the struggles of Black Americans for justice and liberation.

In 1985, Katie Cannon published an article entitled "The Emergence of Black Feminist Consciousness". In this article, she used the term womanism to refer to an approach to interpreting the bible that is concerned for Black women's liberation.

[ 2 ] In 1988, she published Black Womanist Ethics, now considered a classic text in the field.

Biblical scholar Renita Weems published Just a Sister Away: A Womanist Vision of Women's Relationships in the Bible in 1988. A revised edition titled, Just a Sister Away: Understanding The Timeless Connection Between Women of Today and Women in the Bible was published in 2005.  Weems modified the original chapters and added four new chapters. In the text, she examines selected stories of women in the biblical text and connect them to contemporary realities and relationship of women.

[ 5 ] Jacquelyn Grant published White Women's Christ and Black Women's Jesus: Feminist Christology and Womanist Response in 1989.  Grant examined the ways in which Black women interpret Jesus's message, noting that their experience is not the same as black men or white women.  She pointed out that many black women must navigate between the threefold oppression of racism, sexism, and classism.  For Grant, Jesus is a "divine co-sufferer" who suffered in his time like black women do today.

[ citation needed ] [ 6 ] At the American Academy of Religion annual meeting in 1989, womanist scholars in the fields of ethics, theology and biblical studies held a Womanist Approaches to Religion and Society Consultation. This became the start of a group in the AAR that continues today.

[ 2 ] 1993 saw the publication of several major works that would expand the field of womanist theology.

Emilie Townes , an ethicist, published Womanist Justice and Womanist Hope . She also edited A Troubling in My Soul: Womanist Perspectives on Evil and Suffering, an anthology of writing by scholars from a variety of disciplines.

[ 2 ] Also published that year was Sisters in the Wilderness: The Challenge of Womanist God Talk , by Delores S. Williams .

Williams took the work of theologians such as Cone and Grant and expanded upon them. She suggested that womanist theologians need to "search for the voices, actions, opinions, experience, and faith" of black women in order to experience the God who "makes a way out of no way." She defines womanist in the following way: Womanist theology is a prophetic voice concerned about the well-being of the entire African-American community, male and female, adults and children. Womanist theology attempts to help black women see, affirm, and have confidence in the importance of their experience and faith for determining the character of the Christian religion in the African-American community. Womanist theology challenges all oppressive forces impeding black women's struggle for survival and for the development of a positive, productive quality of life conducive to women's and the family's freedom and well-being. Womanist theology opposes all oppression based on race, sex, class, sexual preference, physical ability, and caste.

[ 7 ] — Delores S. Williams , Sisters in the Wilderness Kelly Brown Douglas authored The Black Christ in 1994, building on Grant's earlier work. In the text, Douglas calls on womanist theology to speak to the concerns of people outside the church as well as those within.

[ 8 ] Biblical interpretation [ edit ] Part of a series on Christianity and gender "Adam and Eve" by Albrecht Dürer (1504) Theology Proverbs 31 1 Timothy 2:12 Biblical womanhood Christian views on marriage Deaconess Jesus's interactions with women List of women in the Bible Ordination of women Paul the Apostle and women Rape in the Hebrew Bible Stay-at-home daughter Women as theological figures Women in the Bible Women in Christianity Major positions Christian egalitarianism Complementarianism Other positions Asian feminist theology Biblical patriarchy New feminism Womanist theology Ordination of women in Christianity Ordination of women in Catholicism Ordination of women in Protestantism ( Anglican • Methodist • Church of Scotland ) Church and society African and African-American women in Christianity Christianity and homosexuality Fallen woman Transgender people and Christianity Women in Church history Organizations Feminist Evangelical and Ecumenical Women's Caucus Egalitarian Christians for Biblical Equality Complementarian Council on Biblical Manhood and Womanhood Patriarchal Vision Forum (defunct) Theologians and authors (by view) Feminist Anne Eggebroten Grace Jantzen Virginia Ramey Mollenkott Letha Dawson Scanzoni Egalitarian Gilbert Bilezikian Greg Boyd Gordon Fee Kevin Giles Stanley Grenz Kenneth E. Hagin Paul Jewett Roger Nicole Frank Stagg William J. Webb Complementarian Don Carson John MacArthur Susan Foh John Frame Wayne Grudem George W. Knight III Albert Mohler Douglas Moo Jennifer Morse Raymond C. Ortlund Jr.

Dorothy Patterson Paige Patterson John Piper Vern Poythress Owen Strachan Theologians and authors (by branch) Roman Catholic Hildegard of Bingen Julian of Norwich Catherine of Siena Christine de Pizan Juana Inés de la Cruz Edith Stein Pope John Paul II Phyllis Zagano Eastern Orthodox Frederica Mathewes-Green Protestant April Ulring Larson Catherine Booth Lise-Lotte Rebel Katharine Jefferts Schori v t e Womanist theologians use a variety of methods to approach the scripture. Some attempt to find black women within the biblical narrative so as to reclaim the role and identity of black people in general, and black women specifically, within the Bible. Examples include the social ethicist Cheryl Sanders and the womanist theologian Karen Baker-Fletcher . Some approach the Bible "objectively" to critically evaluate text that degrades women and people of color and to offer an African-centered form, to resist male domination and bias, or what could be termed anti-women or androcentric attitudes and forms. Others draw on resources outside the Bible to enhance the plurality and cohesion of the texts along with our life experiences and reject scripture as a whole or part which is seen to serve male interest only. These methods are not separated and can be endorsed together.

[ 2 ] Patricia-Anne Johnson writes that " Renita J. Weems , a womanist professor and scholar of the Hebrew Bible, examines scripture as a world filled with women of color. Through the use of womanist imagination, Weems helps students to understand female roles, personalities, and woman-to-woman relationships during the time when the biblical texts were written." [ 9 ] Johnson, quoting further from Weems, also shows how Hagar and Esther can be seen as models of resistance for black women: "Womanism may be envisioned as a post-colonial discourse that allows African-American women to embrace a Jesus and a God free of the imperialism of white supremacy." [ 10 ] In 2017, Nyasha Junior published a work in the field of womanist biblical interpretation, An Introduction to Womanist Biblical Interpretation.

In the text, she argues that "womanist biblical interpretation [was] a natural development of African American women engaging in activism instead of simply [as] a response to second-wave feminism." [ 11 ] Critiques [ edit ] Womanist theology has evolved due to critiques that have come about in recent years [ when?

] . Womanist theology has expanded to encompass the spiritual, social, and political concerns of those who do not identify as black Christian women.

[ 12 ] Christian and Christocentric underpinnings provided the framework for early womanist thought.

Monica A. Coleman challenges womanists who claim the title and theological purview that is rooted in Walker's definition, yet do not allow it to reach beyond non-Christians as faulty and a failure to do what it was created to accomplish.

[ 13 ] Coleman, Traci West, and other Black religious scholars have expressed their preference for the term "black feminist" due to the history of womanist scholarship being marked by heterosexism and homophobia.

[ 13 ] Womanist religious scholars have verbalized the challenges that come with identifying as a womanist in the academy.

[ 13 ] Nyasha Junior has written about the problematic assumptions that come with being labeled as a Womanist scholar, and how one does not have to identify as such in order to do Womanist theology.

[ 14 ] There are black feminists and Womanist scholars who believe that their time would be better used making contributions in the field and working with marginalized communities as opposed to being preoccupied with whether one is properly self-identifying.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Feminism portal Asian feminist theology Stacey M. Floyd-Thomas Cheryl Townsend Gilkes Category:Womanist theologians Nyasha Junior Womanism References [ edit ] Footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b Townes, Emilie M. (2006). "Womanist theology". In Keller, Rosemary Skinner; Ruether, Rosemary Radford (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Women and Religion in North America, Set . Indiana University Press. pp.

1165– 1173.

ISBN 978-0-253-11170-8 .

Project MUSE chapter 391667 .

^ a b c d e Townes, Emilie Maureen (2003). "Womanist Theology".

Union Seminary Quarterly Review .

57 ( 3– 4): 159– 176.

hdl : 1803/8226 .

^ Walker 1983 , p. xii.

^ Willis 2016 .

^ Weems, Renita J. (2005).

Just a Sister Away: Understanding the Timeless Connection Between Women of Today and Women in the Bible . Warner Books.

ISBN 978-0-446-57894-3 .

OCLC 60596133 .

[ page needed ] [ non-primary source needed ] ^ Grant, Jacquelyn (1989).

White women's Christ and Black women's Jesus : feminist christology and womanist response . Atlanta, Ga. : Scholars Press.

ISBN 9781555403027 .

^ Williams 1995 , p. 67.

^ Douglas, Kelly Brown (1994).

The Black Christ . United States: Orbis.

ISBN 9781626983168 .

^ Johnson 2002 , p. 203.

^ Johnson 2002 , p. 205.

^ Brown, A. Lauren; deClaissé-Walford, Nancy L. (February 2017). "Book Review: Nyasha Junior. An Introduction to Womanist Biblical Interpretation".

Review & Expositor .

114 (1): 127– 128.

doi : 10.1177/0034637316689562g .

S2CID 152223385 .

^ Marshall Turman, Eboni (13 March 2019).

"Womanist theology and how it has evolved" .

The Christian Century .

^ a b c d Coleman, Monica A. (2006).

"Must I Be a Womanist?" (PDF) .

Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion .

22 (1): 85– 134.

doi : 10.1353/jfs.2006.0001 .

JSTOR 20487856 .

S2CID 145410355 .

Gale A145836782 Project MUSE 196621 ProQuest 195313795 .

^ Junior, Nyasha (2015).

An Introduction to Womanist Biblical Interpretation . Louisville, Kentucky: Westminster John Knox Press. pp. xxi.

ISBN 978-0664259877 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Johnson, Patricia-Anne (2002).

"Womanist Theology as Counter-Narrative" . In Ruether, Rosemary Radford (ed.).

Gender, Ethnicity, and Religion: Views from the Other Side . Fortress Press. pp.

193– 214.

ISBN 978-1-4514-1780-7 .

Mitchem, Stephanie Y. (2002).

Introducing Womanist Theology . Maryknoll, New York: Orbis Books (published 2014).

ISBN 978-1-60833-199-4 .

Walker, Alice (1983).

In Search of our Mothers' Gardens: Womanist Prose . New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

ISBN 978-0-15-144525-7 .

Williams, Delores S.

(1995).

Sisters in the Wilderness: The Challenge of Womanist God-talk . Maryknoll, New York: Orbis Books.

Willis, Gladys J. (2016).

Alice Walker's Influence on Womanist Theology . Xlibris Corporation.

ISBN 978-1-4257-2061-2 .

[ self-published source ] Further reading [ edit ] Sweeney, Hyacinth (2000).

"The Bible as a Tool For Growth for Black Women" . In Aldred, Joe (ed.).

Sisters With Power . Bloomsbury Publishing. pp.

114– 122.

ISBN 978-1-4411-5220-6 .

Thomas, Linda E. (Winter 1998). "Womanist theology, epistemology, and a new anthropological paradigm".

CrossCurrents .

48 (4): 488– 489.

JSTOR 24461012 .

Gale A54064297 .

Riggs, Marcia, ed. (1997).

Can I Get a Witness?: Prophetic Religious Voices of African American Women . Orbis Books.

ISBN 978-1-57075-113-4 .

Floyd-Thomas, Stacey M. (2020). "Womanist Theology". In Floyd-Thomas, Stacey M.; Pinn, Anthony B. (eds.).

Liberation Theologies in the United States . pp.

37– 60.

doi : 10.18574/nyu/9780814728574.003.0006 .

ISBN 978-0-8147-2857-4 .

Marshall Turman, Eboni (13 March 2019).

"Womanist theology and how it has evolved" .

The Christian Century .

v t e Feminist theory Academic fields Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Film theory Literary criticism Biology Composition studies Criminology Digital humanities Economics FPDA Geography History International relations ( Constructivism ) Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Political ecology Political theory Postmodernism Psychology Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology Womanist Asian Feminism portal Related subjects Ecofeminism Feminist method Hegemonic masculinity Women's history Women's studies Feminist theorists Elizabeth Anderson Karen Barad Simone de Beauvoir Wendy Brown Nancy Bauer Judith Butler Kimberlé Crenshaw Hélène Cixous Alice Crary Andrea Dworkin Cynthia Enloe Martha Fineman Nancy Fraser Germaine Greer Donna Haraway Sandra Harding Patricia Hill Collins bell hooks Luce Irigaray Julia Kristeva Catharine A. MacKinnon Martha Nussbaum Val Plumwood Diana E. H. Russell Dorothy E. Smith Marilyn Waring Lists Women's studies journals v t e Liberation theology Foundations Contextual theology Catholic social teaching Christian socialism Evangelical left Marxism and religion Option for the poor Pedagogy of the Oppressed Political theology Postcolonial theology Social Gospel Christian theological praxis Forms Black Dalit Feminist Asian Womanist Integral mission Latin American Catholic Minjung Palestinian Queer Key figures of Latin American liberation theology Argentina Marcella Althaus-Reid Ivan Petrella José Severino Croatto [ es ; de ] Brazil Paulo Freire Paulo Evaristo Arns Rubem Alves Leonardo Boff Frei Betto Hélder Câmara Pedro Casaldáliga Ivone Gebara Aloísio Lorscheider Jung Mo Sung El Salvador Ignacio Ellacuría Ignacio Martín-Baró Segundo Montes Óscar Romero Jon Sobrino Nicaragua Ernesto Cardenal Fernando Cardenal Miguel d'Escoto Brockmann Gaspar Garcia Laviana Other Jean-Bertrand Aristide (Haiti) Miguel A. De La Torre (Cuba) Ada Maria Isasi-Diaz (Cuba) Camilo Torres Restrepo (Colombia) Mario I. Aguilar (Chile) Gustavo Gutiérrez (Peru) Gérard Jean-Juste (Haiti) René Padilla (Ecuador) Samuel Ruiz (Mexico) Juan Luis Segundo (Uruguay) Elsa Támez (Mexico) Key figures of other geographies Africa Allan Boesak (South Africa) Jean-Marc Ela (Cameroon) Rubin Phillip (South Africa) Asia Ahn Byung-Mu (Korea) Naim Ateek (Palestine) Elias Chacour (Palestine) Sebastian Kappen (India) Kim Yong-Bock (Korea) Kung Lap-yan (Hong Kong) Arvind P. Nirmal (India) Park Soon-kyung (Korea) Vinay Samuel (India) Europe Giovanni Franzoni (Italy) Paul Gauthier (France) Johann Baptist Metz (Germany) Jürgen Moltmann (Germany) Dorothee Sölle (Germany) North America Robert McAfee Brown (US) James Cone (US) Chung Hyun Kyung (US) Orlando Costas (US) Virgilio Elizondo (US) Marc H. Ellis (US) Kwok Pui-lan (US) George V. Pixley (US) George Tinker (US) Delores S. Williams (US) Organizations Ecumenical Association of Third World Theologians Episcopal Conference of Latin America Latin American Theological Fellowship World Council of Churches Denominations Liberation Methodist Connexion Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Womanist_theology&oldid=1272172226 " Categories : Liberation theology Multicultural feminism World Christianity Feminist theology Womanism Black feminism Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from June 2023 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from June 2023 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from April 2023 All accuracy disputes Accuracy disputes from November 2017 This page was last edited on 27 January 2025, at 12:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Womanist theology 4 languages Add topic

