Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In international law 2 At private institutions 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Right to protest 12 languages العربية فارسی Hausa Հայերեն Igbo עברית Bahasa Melayu ភាសាខ្មែរ Português Русский Српски / srpski ไทย Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of political freedom Janitorial workers exercising their right to protest in front of the MTV building in Santa Monica , California .

The right to protest may be a manifestation of the right to freedom of assembly , the right to freedom of association , and the right to freedom of speech .

[ 1 ] Additionally, protest and restrictions on protest have lasted as long as governments have.

[ 2 ] In international law [ edit ] Many international treaties contain clear articulations of the right to protest. Such agreements include the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights , especially Articles 9 to 11; and the 1966 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , especially Articles 18 to 22. Articles 9 enunciates the "right to freedom of thought, conscience, and religion." [ 3 ] Article 10 enunciates the "right to freedom of expression." [ 3 ] Article 11 enunciates the "right to freedom of association with others, including the right to form and to join trade unions for the protection of his interests." [ 3 ] However, in these and other agreements the rights of freedom of assembly, freedom of association, and freedom of speech are subject to certain limitations.

Black Friday in Tehran ,  8 September 1978.

For example, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights contains prohibitions on " propaganda of war" and advocacy of "national, racial or religious hatred "; and it allows the restriction of the freedom to assembly if it is necessary "in a democratic society in the interests of national security or public safety, public order, the protection of public health or morals or the protection of the rights and freedoms of others." (Articles 20 and 21) [ 3 ] Different places have passed their own clarification of these rights.

Protesting, however, is not necessarily violent or a threat to the interests of national security or public safety. Nor is it necessarily civil disobedience , when protesting does not involve violating the laws of the state. Protests, even campaigns of nonviolent resistance , or civil resistance , can often have the character (in addition to using nonviolent methods) of positively supporting a democratic and constitutional order. This can happen, for example, when such resistance arises in response to a military coup d'état ; [ 4 ] or in the somewhat similar case of a refusal of the state leadership to surrender office following defeat in an election.

At private institutions [ edit ] Mary Beth Tinker was given detention for wearing a black armband to protest the Vietnam War , leading to the Tinker v. Des Moines case.

Many employers, educational institutions, [ 5 ] and professional associations [ 6 ] maintain demonstration policies that limit the rights of their members to protest, for instance by restricting them to free speech zones . In the United States, the landmark 1969 Tinker v. Des Moines Supreme Court case established the student right to protest so long as it does not cause "substantial disruption".

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Direct action Demonstration (protest) Protest Right of revolution References [ edit ] ^ "The Historic Right to Peaceful Protest" . YourRights.org.uk ( Liberty ). 19 September 2006. Archived from the original on 30 April 2008.

^ Cooper, Jo (2005). Addis, Megan; Morrow, Penelope (eds.).

"The Right to Peaceful Protest" in Your Rights: The Liberty Guide to Human Rights (8 ed.). Pluto Press.

ISBN 9780745322766 .

JSTOR j.ctt183q56g .

^ a b c d Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and/or International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Office of the United Nations High Commissioner of Human Rights ^ Adam Roberts , "Civil Resistance to Military Coups", Journal of Peace Research , Oslo, vol. 12, no. 1, 1975, pp. 19-36.

^ Long, Waverly (2021-11-10).

"Senior administrators emphasize Northwestern's demonstration policy" .

The Daily Northwestern . Retrieved 2022-03-21 .

^ Mather, Victor (2020-06-10).

"How Sports Leagues Regulate Athletes' Activism" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2022-03-21 .

^ Shackelford, Kelly (November 2014).

"Mary Beth and John Tinker and Tinker v. Des Moines : Opening the schoolhouse gates to first amendment freedom: TINKER (1969) AND STUDENTS' FREE SPEECH" .

Journal of Supreme Court History .

39 (3): 372– 385.

doi : 10.1111/j.1540-5818.2014.12054.x .

External links [ edit ] Know Your Rights: Demonstrations and Protests (PDF) - American Civil Liberties Union v t e Substantive human rights What is considered a human right is in some cases controversial; not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights Civil and political Equality before the law Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention Freedom of assembly Freedom of association Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Freedom from discrimination Freedom of information Freedom of movement Freedom of religion Freedom from slavery Freedom of speech Freedom of thought Freedom from torture LGBT rights Liberty Nationality Personhood Presumption of innocence Access to justice Right of asylum Right to die Right to a fair trial Right to counsel Right to family life Right to keep and bear arms Right to life Right to petition Right to privacy Right to protest Right to refuse medical treatment Right to resist Right of return Right of self-defense Right to truth Security of person Speedy trial Suffrage right to be a candidate Right to homeland Economic, social and cultural Digital rights Equal pay for equal work Fair remuneration Labor rights Right to an adequate standard of living Right to clothing Right to development Right to education Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to Internet access Right to property Right to public participation Right of reply Right to rest and leisure Right of return Right to science and culture Right to social security Right to water Right to work Sexual and reproductive Abortion Family planning Family rights Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation Freedom from forced circumcision Intersex human rights LGBT rights Sexual and reproductive health Right to sexuality Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Right_to_protest&oldid=1292227081 " Category : Human rights Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 21:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Right to protest 12 languages Add topic

