Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Books 2 Authors 3 Journals and magazines 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents CSIRO Publishing Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Australian science publisher CSIRO Publishing Parent company Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) Founded 1995 Country of origin Australia Headquarters location Clayton, Victoria Distribution NewSouth Books (Australia) [ 1 ] Eurospan (EMEA) Stylus Publishing (the Americas) [ 2 ] Publication types journals, books, magazines, training Official website www .publish .csiro .au CSIRO Publishing is an Australian -based science and technology publisher. It publishes books, journals and magazines across a range of scientific disciplines, including agriculture , chemistry , plant and animal sciences, natural history and environmental management . It also produces interactive learning modules for primary school students and provides writing workshops for researchers.

CSIRO Publishing operates within the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO). It was established as a stand-alone business unit in 1995.

[ 3 ] Books [ edit ] CSIRO Publishing publishes books in a number of categories, [ 4 ] including: Animals: behaviour; birds; domesticated; ecology and management; field guides; fish; genetics and evolution; health and welfare; invasive; invertebrates; mammals and marsupials; reproduction and physiology; reptiles and amphibians; and wildlife.

Built Environment: architecture; building; codes and standards; engineering; landscape architecture; and planning and design.

Food and Agriculture: agribusiness ; agroforestry; aquaculture; crops and pastures; farm management; food and beverages; landcare; livestock codes; livestock management; sustainability; viticulture; and weeds, pests and diseases.

Gardening and Horticulture: fruit, vegetables and flowers; horticulture; native plants and gardens; sustainability; techniques and design; and trees, shrubs and grasses.

Health: environmental health; general health; and nutrition.

Marine and Freshwater: coastal science; fisheries and fishing; freshwater ecology; and marine ecology.

Natural Environment: biodiversity and ecology; climate; energy; environmental management; fire; natural resources; policy and risk; pollution and waste; restoration ecology ; soils; sustainability; and water.

Physical Sciences: astronomy; chemistry; earth science; mathematics; mining and resources; physics; prehistory; and technology.

Plant Science: algae and lichens; aquatic and marine plants; ecology and management; field and regional guides; flowering plants; grasses; identification and systematics; mosses and fungi; pathology; and physiology and chemistry.

Science in Society: children's books; education; heritage and history; ideas and issues; Indigenous Australia; leisure and tourism; popular science; and populations.

Authors [ edit ] CSIRO Publishing authors include or have included: Michael Braby [The Complete Field Guide to Butterflies of Australia] Robin Brimblecombe, Kara Rosemeier [Positive Energy Homes] Harold Cogger [Reptiles and Amphibians of Australia] Stephen Debus [Birds of Prey of Australia] Roger Farrow [Insects of South-Eastern Australia] Michelle Gleeson [Miniature Lives] Jenny Gray [Zoo Ethics] Gisela Kaplan [Bird Minds] David Lindenmayer [environmental titles] Peter Menkhorst et al.

The Australian Bird Guide Robert Whyte , Greg Anderson [A Field Guide to Spiders of Australia] Journals and magazines [ edit ] Main category: CSIRO Publishing academic journals CSIRO Publishing publishes the following journals and magazines: Animal Production Science Australian Health Review Australian Journal of Botany Australian Journal of Chemistry Australian Journal of Primary Health Australian Journal of Zoology Australian Mammalogy Australian Systematic Botany Crop and Pasture Science Double Helix Environmental Chemistry Exploration Geophysics Functional Plant Biology Health Promotion Journal of Australia Healthcare Infection (defunct) Historical Records of Australian Science International Journal of Wildland Fire Invertebrate Systematics Marine and Freshwater Research Microbiology Australia Pacific Conservation Biology Preview Proceedings of the Royal Society of Victoria Reproduction, Fertility and Development Sexual Health Soil Research The APPEA Journal The Rangeland Journal The South Pacific Journal of Natural Science Wildlife Research References [ edit ] ^ "CSIRO PUBLISHING | Books" . Retrieved 2017-12-26 .

^ "CSIRO PUBLISHING | Books" . Retrieved 2017-12-26 .

^ "CSIRO PUBLISHING | About Us" .

www.publish.csiro.au . Retrieved 2017-05-02 .

^ "CSIRO PUBLISHING | Books" .

www.publish.csiro.au . Retrieved 2017-05-02 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX This article about a publishing company is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=CSIRO_Publishing&oldid=1220694960 " Categories : Book publishing companies of Australia CSIRO Non-profit academic publishers Academic publishing companies Publishing company stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia All stub articles This page was last edited on 25 April 2024, at 10:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents CSIRO Publishing Add languages Add topic

