Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Context 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Ancient 2.1.1 Ancient Greece 2.2 Modern 3 See also Toggle See also subsection 3.1 Notable individuals or movements 4 References Toggle the table of contents Religious ecstasy 13 languages বাংলা Deutsch Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Português Русский Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Altered state of consciousness For related topics, see Ecstasy (emotion) and Ecstasy (philosophy) .

A Cherub piercing the heart of Saint Teresa of Avila while in religious ecstasy. Oil on Canvas. By Roman artisan Giuseppe Bazzani . Circa 1750.

Part of a series on Spirituality Outline Religion History Timeline Traditional Elite religion Jewish Merkabah Kabbalah Hasidism Christian Catholic Mysticism Sufism Folk religion Modern Buddhist modernism New religious movement Secular spirituality " Spiritual but not religious " Syncretism Spiritual experience Lived religion List of substances used in rituals Mystical or religious experience Oceanic feeling Religious ecstasy Spiritual practice Spiritual development Divine embodiment Ego death Entheogen History Archaeological record Aztec Maya Cannabis Individuation No-mind Self-actualization Spiritual activism Influences Western General Divine illumination Pantheism Panentheism Antiquity Divinity Gnosticism Hermeticism Neoplatonism Western esotericism Medieval Mysticism Early modern Perennial philosophy Jakob Böhme Emanuel Swedenborg Pietism Modern Romanticism Transcendentalism Universalism New Thought Theosophy Anthroposophy Occultism Spiritualism Esoteric Christianity New Age Orientalist Comparative religion Neo-Advaita Nonduality Orientalism Theosophical Society Asian Pre-historic Proto-Indo-Iranian religion Iran Zoroastrianism India Advaita Vedanta Buddha-nature Enlightenment Kevala jnana Madhyamaka Moksha Neo-Vedanta Tantra Yoga Yogachara East-Asia Taoism Other non-Western Animism Shamanism Totemism Psychological Humanistic psychology Mindfulness Positive psychology Self-help Self-realization True self and false self Research Neurological Mystical psychosis Cognitive science of religion Neuroscience of religion Geschwind syndrome Evolutionary psychology of religion Category v t e Religious ecstasy is a purported form of altered state of consciousness characterized by greatly reduced external awareness and reportedly expanded interior mental and spiritual awareness, frequently accompanied by visions and emotional (and sometimes physical) euphoria .

Although the experience is usually brief in time, [ 1 ] there are records of such experiences lasting several days or even more, and of recurring experiences of ecstasy during a person's lifetime.

In Sufism , the term is referred to as wajd . In Buddhism , piti , usually translated as "joy" or "rapture", is an element of jhana , a state of mental oneness with an object that one focuses on in meditation.

[ 2 ] Context [ edit ] The adjective "religious" means that the experience occurs in connection with religious activities or is interpreted in the context of a religion. Journalist Marghanita Laski writes in her study "Ecstasy in Religious and Secular Experiences", first published in 1961: Epithets are very often applied to mystical experiences including ecstasies without, apparently, any clear idea about the distinctions that are being made. Thus we find experiences given such names as nature, religious, aesthetic, neo-platonic, etc.. experiences, where in some cases the name seems to derive from a trigger, sometimes from the over belief.

History [ edit ] Ancient [ edit ] Yoga provides techniques to attain a state of ecstasy called samādhi . According to practitioners, there are various stages of ecstasy, the highest being Nirvikalpa samādhi.

Bhakti Yoga in particular places emphasis on ecstasy as being one of the fruits of its practice.

In Buddhism , especially in the Pali Canon , there are eight states of trance also called absorption. The first four states are Rupa or, materially-oriented. The next four are Arupa or non-material. These eight states are preliminary trances which lead up to final saturation. In the Visuddhimagga , great effort and years of sustained meditation are practiced to reach the first absorption, and not all individuals can accomplish it at all.

Ancient Greece [ edit ] Ecstasy in ancient Greece , notably in the Dionysian Mysteries , is characterized by ecstatic dance and god-like abilities and removed the inhibition and social constraints of dividing social elements such as gender and wealth. Unlike other mystery religions of the time, Dionysiac rites required no formal initiation and were accessible to all women, regardless of wealth or citizenship. Women were able to express themselves beyond domestic roles and engage in acts typically reserved for men, such as hunting and warfare.

[ 3 ] All rites and rituals occurred outdoors, with women even sleeping outdoors under pine trees in the mountains. Despite being wild in nature, the rituals followed a deliberate structure. The Maenads gathered at appointed times, arranged themselves in ranks, and sang sacred songs in a coordinated fashion. Typical attire, depicted on Amphora 's and other artistic mediums, includes women in long garbs, dancing barefoot with ivy wreaths on their heads. Their ritual cry was a communal call marking moments of spiritual climax.

[ 3 ] Ecstasy was induced during rites through methods like music, primarily flutes and drums, community dancing, and head tossing. Their altered state of consciousness often involved vivid psychological experiences, such as hallucinations—seeing visions of Dionysos in the form of fire or a bull, or hearing his voice without seeing him. These experiences were not metaphorical but considered real manifestations of divine contact. In their ecstatic state, the Maenads were said to feed wild animals—such as fawns and wolf cubs—with their own milk. Using their thyrsoi, they could produce wine, water, and honey from the earth or rock. Acts of extraordinary strength, such as tearing bulls apart and uprooting entire pine trees without tools, were seen as signs of divine possession.

[ 3 ] Euripides' The Bacchae , known for its depiction of ecstasy in this manner, describes the Maenads (female followers of Dionysus) as being able to do superhuman things, such as carry open flames and walk barefoot in the snow without being physically hurt in any way. Dionysus blesses the Maenads with ecstasy and these god-like abilities to exact his revenge on Pentheus , allowing them to chase Pentheus' men away and remain unharmed against their iron javelins. Even Agave, Pentheus' own mother, is so compelled and entranced by the Dionysian ecstasy that she leads his defeat and presents his severed head back in Thebes, so deep in her hallucination that she believes it to be a lion head, and is confused when she is met with horror at the sight of the decapitated King.

[ 3 ] Modern [ edit ] The religious ecstasy of Saint Teresa of Avila of the Carmelite Order Modern meditator experiences in the Thai Forest Tradition , as well as other Theravadan traditions, demonstrate that this effort and rarity is necessary only to become completely immersed in the absorptions and experience no other sensations. It is possible to experience the absorptions in a less intense state with much less practice.

In the monotheistic tradition , ecstasy is usually associated with communion and oneness with God . However, such experiences can also be personal mystical experiences with no significance to anyone but the person experiencing them. Some charismatic Christians practice ecstatic states (such as "being slain in the Spirit ") and interpret these as given by the Holy Spirit . The firewalkers of Greece dance themselves into a state of ecstasy at the annual Anastenaria , when they believe themselves under the influence of Constantine the Great .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Historically, large groups of individuals have experienced religious ecstasies during periods of Christian revivals , to the point of causing controversy as to the origin and nature of these experiences.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] In response to claims that all emotional expressions of religious ecstasy were attacks on order and theological soundness from the Devil, Jonathan Edwards published his influential Religious Affections . Here, he argues, religious ecstasy could come from oneself, the Devil, or God, and it was only by observing the fruit, or changes in inner thought and behaviour, that one could determine if the religious ecstasy had come from God.

[ 9 ] St. Rose of Lima, who was canonised in 1671, 54 years after her death In modern Pentecostal , Charismatic and Spirit-filled Christianity, numerous examples of religious ecstasy have transpired, similar to historic revivals. These occurrences have changed significantly since the time of the Toronto Blessing and several other North American so-called revivals and outpourings from the mid-1990s. From that time, religious ecstasy in these movements has been characterized by increasingly unusual behaviors that are understood by adherents to be the anointing of the Holy Spirit and evidence of God's "doing a new work". One of the most controversial and strange examples is that of spiritual birthing [ 10 ] – a practice during which women, and at times even men, claim to be having actual contractions of the womb while they moan and retch as though experiencing childbirth.

[ 11 ] It is said to be a prophetic action bringing spiritual blessings from God into the world. Many believe spiritual birthing to be highly demonic and more occult-like than Christian. Religious ecstasy in these Christian movements has also been witnessed in the form of squealing, shrieking, an inability to stand or sit, uttering apocalyptic prophecies, holy laughter , crying and barking. Some people have made dramatic claims of sighting "gold dust", "angel feathers", "holy clouds", or the spontaneous appearance of precious gem stones during ecstatic worship events.

[ 12 ] The Ecstasy of St.

Catherine of Siena by Pompeo Batoni In hagiographies (writings about Christian saints ), many instances are recorded in which saints are granted ecstasies. According to the Catholic Encyclopedia [ 13 ] religious ecstasy (called "supernatural ecstasy") includes two elements: one, interior and invisible, in which the mind rivets its attention on a religious subject, and another, corporeal and visible, in which the activity of the senses is suspended, reducing the effect of external sensations upon the subject and rendering him or her resistant to awakening. The witnesses of a Marian apparition often describe experiencing these elements of ecstasy.

Modern witchcraft traditions may define themselves as "ecstatic traditions", and focus on reaching ecstatic states in their rituals. The Reclaiming Tradition and the Feri Tradition are two modern ecstatic Witchcraft examples.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] According to the Indian spiritual teacher Meher Baba , God-intoxicated souls known in Sufism as masts experience a unique type of spiritual ecstasy: "[M]asts are desperately in love with God – or consumed by their love for God. Masts do not suffer from what may be called a disease. They are in a state of mental disorder because their minds are overcome by such intense spiritual energies that are far too much for them, forcing them to lose contact with the world, shed normal human habits and customs, and civilized society and live in a state of spiritual splendor but physical squalor. They are overcome by an agonizing love for God and are drowned in their ecstasy. Only the divine love embodied in a Perfect Master can reach them." [ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Altered state of consciousness – Any condition which is significantly different from a normal waking state Divine illumination – Human thought aided by divine grace Divine madness (religion) – Behavior linked to spiritual pursuits Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Ecstasy (philosophy) – Term used in philosophy with different meanings in different traditions Ecstasy (emotion) – Subjective experience of total involvement of subject with object of their awareness Enlightenment in Buddhism – Goal of Buddhist practice Entheogen – Psychoactive substances that induce spiritual experiences Eroto-comatose lucidity – Sex magic technique Higher consciousness – Aspirational level of awareness Mast (Sufism) Mysticism – Traditions of human transformation aided by religious experiences Neurotheology – Attempts to explain religious experience in neuroscientific terms Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Numinous – Arousing spiritual or religious emotion; mysterious or awe-inspiring Religious experience – Experience interpreted within a religious framework Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Self-transcendence – Psychological concept: expansion of personal boundaries Sleeping preacher – Type of Christian preacher Soul flight – The concept of soul flight Notable individuals or movements [ edit ] Montanism – 2nd-century Christian movement, a prophetic sect, founded by Montanus and two female colleagues, Prisca (or Priscilla) and Maximilla, who attained ecstatic visions through fasting and prayer.

Alexander Scriabin – Russian composer and pianist (1872–1915), who intended his music to induce religious ecstasy.

Anastenaria – Greek firewalking ritual Thomas Aquinas – Italian Dominican theologian and philosopher (1225–1274) experienced an ecstasy during a church-service towards the end of his life that caused him to stop writing.

Dionysos / Bacchus – Ancient Greek god of winemaking and wine, religious ecstasy and ritual madness.

Teresa of Avila – Roman Catholic saint (1515–1582) Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets , Mystic , first entered states of ecstasy while studying religious texts when taken ill in a Carmelite cloister.

Catherine of Siena – Italian Dominican saint (1347–1380), an important figure in bridal theology Hildegard of Bingen – German nun and polymath (c. 1098 – 1179), abbess and Christian mystic .

Joan of Arc – French folk heroine and saint (1412–1431), motivated by ecstatic visions to partake in war.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu – 15th-century Indian Vaishnavite Hindu saint Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets , founder of Gaudiya Vaishnavism , immersed into deeper and deeper stages of ecstasy towards Krishna during the last 24 years of his life.

Pio of Pietrelcina – 20th-century Italian saint, priest, stigmatist and mystic (1887–1968) Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Joseph of Cupertino – Italian Franciscan friar Rabia Basri – Female Sufi scholar and saint (died 801), mystic poet Maulanah Rumi – Sufi scholar and poet (1207–1273), mystic poet Hafez – Persian poet and mystic (1325–1390), mystic poet Moinuddin Chishti – Persian Islamic scholar and mystic (1143–1236) Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Amir Khusrow – Indian poet, writer, singer and scholar (1253–1325) Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets mystic poet Marguerite Porete – French mystic and poet (died 1310), burned at the stake for her writings.

Simone Weil – French philosopher (1909–1943) Fyodor Dostoevsky – Russian novelist with epilepsy, notable for including Christian themes, described feelings of religious euphoria before a seizure would take place (1821-1881) References [ edit ] ^ Marghanita Laski, Ecstasy. A Study of Some Secular and Religious Experiences . The Cresset Press, London, 1961. p. 57 ^ Gunaratana, Henepola (1995).

"The Jhanas in Theravada Buddhist Meditation" .

Access to Insight . Retrieved 2 March 2025 .

^ a b c d Portefaix, Lilian (1982). "Concepts of Ecstasy in Euripides' Bacchanals and Their Interpretation". In Holm, Nils G. (ed.).

Religious Ecstasy . Scripta Instituti Donneriani Aboensis. Vol. 11. Almqvist & Wiksell International. pp.

201– 210.

^ Xygalatas, Dimitris, "Firewalking and the Brain: The Physiology of High-Arousal Rituals", in: Joseph Bulbulia, Richard Sosis, Erica Harris, Russell Genet, Cheryl Genet, and Karen Wyman (eds.) Evolution of Religion: Studies, Theories, and Critiques , Santa Margarita, Calif.: Collins Foundation Press 2007, pp.189–195 ^ Xygalatas, Dimitris, 2012.

The Burning Saints. Cognition and Culture in the Fire-walking Rituals of the Anastenaria Archived 2012-09-02 at the Wayback Machine London: Equinox ISBN 978-1-84553-976-4 ^ Tomkinson, John L., Anastenaria , Anagnosis, Athens, 2003 ISBN 960-87186-7-8 pp.90–99 ^ Chauncy, Charles.

Seasonable Thoughts on the State of Religion in New England . 1743 ^ Edwards, Jonathan (1742).

Some Thoughts Concerning the Present Revival in New England and the Way it Ought to be Acknowledged and Promoted .

^ Treatise on Religious Affections at Google Books ^ "Impartations, Anointing and Manifestation" .

^ "TRAVAIL AND APOSTOLIC ORDER - Vision International Ministries" .

^ "Demoniac False Preacher Todd Bentley Says Angel Feathers Are Manifesting at His 'Revival' Meetings" . 17 April 2016.

^ Ecstasy ^ M. Macha Nightmare, "Reclaiming Tradition Witchcraft" , Witchvox, 2001. Retrieved on 2008-01-13.

^ Cholla and Gabriel, Ecstasy and Transgression in the Faery Tradition , Witch Eye, 2000. Retrieved on 2008-01-13.

^ Kalchuri, Bhau: Meher Prabhu: Lord Meher, the Biography of the Avatar of the Age, Meher Baba , Volume Six, Manifestation, Inc., 1986, p. 2035 v t e Private revelation in the Catholic Church Revelations Apparitional experience Christian mysticism Locution interior Marian apparition Religious ecstasy Vision (spirituality) Visions of Jesus and Mary Miracles Miraculous events Eucharistic miracle Miracle of Lanciano Lourdes water Miracle of the Sun Odour of sanctity Tabor Light Thaumaturgy Weeping statue Extraordinary graces Bilocation Charism Gift of miracles Gifts of healing Glossolalia Interpretation of tongues Prophecy Word of Knowledge Word of wisdom Levitation Stigmata Discernment Documents Code of canon law Haurietis aquas Norms regarding the manner of proceeding in the discernment of presumed apparitions or revelations Tribus circiter Magisterium Rule of Faith Sensus fidei Theology Bridal theology Christology Mariology Mystical theology Popular piety Acts of reparation First Thursdays Devotion Immaculate Heart of Mary Consecration First Saturdays Devotion Miraculous Medal Seven Dolors Pilgrimage Rosary Rosary of the Holy Wounds Sacred Heart First Fridays Devotion Divine Mercy Chaplet of the Divine Mercy Eucharistic adoration Holy Hour Our Lady of Tears Saint Michael in the Catholic Church Chaplet of Saint Michael Prayer to Saint Michael Scapular Shrines Marian shrines Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe Cathedral-Basilica of Our Lady of the Pillar Chapel of Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal Knock Shrine Sanctuary of Our Lady of Fátima Sanctuary of Our Lady of Lourdes Shrine of Our Lady of Champion Sanctuary of Our Lady of Graces of Onuva Shrine of Our Lady of the Hens Shrine of the Virgin of the Rosary of Pompei Sanctuary of Our Lady of the Rosary of San Nicolás Others Basilica of the Sacred Heart of Paray-le-Monial Sanctuary of the Divine Mercy Sanctuary of Christ the King Shrine of the Sacred Heart of Jesus Sanctuary of Saint Michael the Archangel Catholic Church portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Religious_ecstasy&oldid=1303564399 " Categories : Charismatic and Pentecostal Christianity Religious practices Spirituality Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 18:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Religious ecstasy 13 languages Add topic

