Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Some precursors Toggle Some precursors subsection 1.1 Locke 1.2 Descartes 2 American critical realism 3 British critical realism 4 German critical realism 5 See also 6 Notes 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Critical realism (philosophy of perception) 20 languages العربية Български Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Français हिन्दी Italiano Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is missing information about additional information on sections.

Please expand the article to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page .

( September 2024 ) Theory that some of our sense-data can accurately represent external objects This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Critical realism" philosophy of perception – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In the philosophy of perception , critical realism is the theory that some of our sense-data (for example, those of primary qualities ) can and do accurately represent external objects, properties, and events, while other of our sense-data (for example, those of secondary qualities and perceptual illusions) do not accurately represent any external objects, properties, and events. Put simply, critical realism highlights a mind-dependent aspect of the world that reaches to understand (and comes to an understanding of) the mind-independent world.

Some precursors [ edit ] Locke [ edit ] According to Locke —following a tradition which can be traced back to the ancient ( Democritus ) and modern ( Galileo Galilei , Isaac Newton ) atomism —some sense-data , namely the sense-data of secondary qualities (i.e. colours, tastes, smells, sounds), do not represent anything in the external world, even if they are caused by external qualities (primary qualities). By its talk of sense-data and representation, this theory depends on or presupposes the truth of representationalism .

Descartes [ edit ] René Descartes developed the theory that, since we could not definitely prove anything we experienced, the only thing which is sure to exist is our mind. He explains this by stating that in order to experience anything—real or fake—we first have to exist at all. That led to his famous saying " Cogito, ergo sum ." (I think, therefore I am.).

American critical realism [ edit ] The American critical realist movement was a response both to direct realism , as well as to idealism and pragmatism .  In very broad terms, American critical realism was a form of representative realism , in which there are objects that stand as mediators between independent real objects and perceivers. Prominent developers of American critical realism are Roy Wood Sellars and his son Wilfrid Sellars , [ 1 ] and Maurice Mandelbaum .

[ 2 ] One innovation was that these mediators are not ideas ( British empiricism ), but properties, essences, or "character complexes".

British critical realism [ edit ] Similar developments occurred in the UK.  Major figures included Samuel Alexander , John Cook Wilson , H. A. Prichard , H. H. Price , and C. D. Broad .

German critical realism [ edit ] Nicolai Hartmann renewed the interest in the critical realist theory in Germany.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-realism Critical realism (philosophy of the social sciences) New realism (philosophy) Subtle realism Notes [ edit ] ^ Willem deVries , 2014.

Wilfrid Sellars ," Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Aug. 11.

^ Verstegen, Ian F., ed. (2010).

Maurice Mandelbaum and American critical realism . Critical realism—interventions. London; New York: Routledge .

doi : 10.4324/9780203883082 .

ISBN 9780415473026 .

OCLC 316836221 .

^ Herbert Schnädelbach, Philosophy in Germany 1831-1933 , Cambridge UP, 1984, p. 209.

Further reading [ edit ] Coelho, Ivo, 2010. "Critical Realism." ACPI Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Ed. Johnson J. Puthenpurackal. (Bangalore, ATC).1:341–344.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Critical_realism_(philosophy_of_perception)&oldid=1292154088 " Categories : Philosophy of perception Metaphysical realism Epistemological theories Hidden categories: Articles to be expanded from September 2024 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2019 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 13:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Critical realism (philosophy of perception) 20 languages Add topic

