Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 1.1 Cities and Commercial Significance 1.2 Extent 2 Geology 3 Ecology 4 History 5 Fauna 6 Tourism 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Gulf of Aqaba 89 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaelg Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Tyap Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 28°45′N 34°45′E ﻿ / ﻿ 28.750°N 34.750°E ﻿ / 28.750; 34.750 Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 9 August 2025 .

Large gulf at the northern tip of the Red Sea Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Eilat خَلِيج الْعَقَبَة ( Arabic ) מפרץ אילת ( Hebrew ) The Sinai Peninsula with the Gulf of Aqaba to the east and the Gulf of Suez to the west Gulf of Aqaba Location West Asia Coordinates 28°45′N 34°45′E ﻿ / ﻿ 28.750°N 34.750°E ﻿ / 28.750; 34.750 Type Gulf Primary inflows Red Sea Basin countries Egypt, Israel, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia Max. length 160 km (99 mi) Max. width 24 km (15 mi) Surface area 239 km 2 (92 sq mi) Max. depth 1,850 m (6,070 ft) Settlements Aqaba , Eilat , Taba , Haql , Sharm El Sheikh The Gulf of Aqaba ( Arabic : خَلِيج الْعَقَبَة , romanized : Khalīj al-ʿAqaba ) or Gulf of Eilat ( Hebrew : מפרץ אילת , romanized : Mifrátz Eilát ) is a large gulf at the northern tip of the Red Sea , east of the Sinai Peninsula and west of the Arabian Peninsula . Its coastline is divided among four countries: Egypt , Israel , Jordan , and Saudi Arabia .

Geography [ edit ] The gulf is east of the Sinai Peninsula and west of the Arabian Peninsula. With the Gulf of Suez to the west, it extends from the northern portion of the Red Sea. It reaches a maximum depth of 1,850 metres (6,070 ft) in its central area: the Gulf of Suez is significantly wider but less than 100 m (330 ft) deep.

The Sinai Peninsula separating the Gulf of Suez to the west and the Gulf of Aqaba, to the east.

View of the Gulf of Aqaba near Nuweiba, Egypt.

The gulf measures 24 km (15 mi) at its widest point and stretches some 160 km (100 mi) north from the Straits of Tiran to where Israel meets Egypt and Jordan.

The city of Aqaba is the largest on the gulf Like the coastal waters of the Red Sea, the gulf is one of the world's premier sites for diving. The area is especially rich in coral and other marine biodiversity and has both accidental shipwrecks and vessels deliberately sunk in an effort to provide a habitat for marine organisms and bolster the local dive tourism industry.

Cities and Commercial Significance [ edit ] At this northern end of the gulf are three important cities: Taba in Egypt, Eilat in Israel, and Aqaba in Jordan. As the only point of access to the Red Sea for the Israel and Jordan, the gulf has held and continues to hold commercial and strategic importance especially.  In the case of the Israel, these few kilometers' access to the gulf were included in the original (never implemented) 1947 UN Palestine Partition Plan and became crucially important for trade during times of hostility with its neighbors (e.g. when Egypt closed access to the Suez Canal ),  while Jordan's 26 kilometres (16 mi) shoreline on the gulf is the only part of Jordan's borders preventing it from being completely landlocked. The gulf also is home to popular resorts for tourists seeking to enjoy the warm climate.

Further south, Haql is the largest Saudi Arabian city on the gulf.  On Sinai, Sharm el-Sheikh and Dahab are the major centres.

The largest population center is Aqaba, with a population of 148,398 (2015), followed by Eilat with a population of 50,724 (2020).

Extent [ edit ] The International Hydrographic Organization defines the southern limit of the gulf as "A line running from Ràs al Fasma Southwesterly to Requin Island ( 27°57′N 34°36′E ﻿ / ﻿ 27.950°N 34.600°E ﻿ / 27.950; 34.600 ) through Tiran Island to the Southwest point thereof and thence Westward on a parallel (27°54'N) to the coast of the Sinaï Peninsula".

[ 1 ] Geology [ edit ] The gulf is one of two gulfs created by the Sinai Peninsula's bifurcation of the northern Red Sea, the Gulf of Suez lying to the west of the peninsula and the Gulf of Aqaba to its east. Geologically, the gulf forms the southern end of the Dead Sea Transform . It contains three small pull-apart basins , the Elat Deep, Aragonese Deep and Dakar Deep, formed between four left lateral strike-slip fault segments. Movement on one of these faults caused the 1995 Gulf of Aqaba earthquake .

[ 2 ] Ecology [ edit ] Further information: Red Sea § Ecosystem History [ edit ] " Isle of Graia Gulf of Akabah Arabia Petraea", 1839 lithograph of a trade caravan in The Holy Land, Syria, Idumea, Arabia, Egypt, and Nubia , by Louis Haghe from an original by David Roberts .

Trade across the Red Sea between Thebes ' port of Elim and Elath at the head of the gulf is documented as early as the Fourth Dynasty of Egypt . Expeditions crossing the Red Sea and heading south to Punt are mentioned in the fifth , the sixth , the eleventh , the twelfth and the eighteenth dynasties of Egypt , when Hatshepsut built a fleet to support the trade and journeyed south to Punt in a six-month voyage.

[ citation needed ] Thebes used Nubian gold or Nub from her conquests south into Kush to facilitate the purchase of frankincense , myrrh , bitumen , natron , juniper oil, linen , and copper amulets for the mummification industry at Karnak . Egyptian settlements near Timna at the head of the gulf date to the Eighteenth dynasty of Egypt .

At the northern edge, the ancient city of Ayla (in present-day Aqaba) was a commercial hub for the Nabateans . The Romans built the Via Traiana Nova , which joined the King's Highway at Aqaba and connected Africa to Asia and the Levant and Red Sea shipping.

Aqaba was a major Ottoman port, connected to Damascus and Medina by the Hejaz railway .  During World War I, the Battle of Aqaba was the key battle that ended a 500-year Ottoman rule over the region of Syria .

[ citation needed ] Fauna [ edit ] In general, the fauna in the Red Sea represents the fauna in the waters of the Indian Ocean , except that many species cannot penetrate it due to salinity and temperature limitations and some are only found in the southern part of the Red Sea. A large part of the species in the Red Sea are endemic and the proportion of several groups reaches about 30%. It is possible that some of them developed during the Tethys Sea period. The endemic species are more suitable to the conditions in the Red Sea and the Gulf of Eilat and therefore thrive there more than the oceanic species.

[ 3 ] Tourism [ edit ] The gulf is one of the most popular diving destinations in the world. About 250,000 dives are performed annually in Eilat's 11 km coastline, and diving represents 10% of the tourism income of this area.

[ 4 ] The Landscape of Wadi Rum to the east of the northern edge of the gulf is a popular destination. Other destinations are the ruins of the iron-age civilization of Ayla in the city of Aqaba, the site of the World War I Battle of Aqaba , led by Lawrence of Arabia .

Whales , orcas , dolphins , dugongs , and whale sharks live in the gulf as well.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Coral World Underwater Observatory at Eilat Taba beach Red Sea coral and marine fish A resort near Eilat's Coral Beach See also [ edit ] Al Jawf Region / Tabuk Region Aqaba Governorate Israeli Diving Federation South Sinai Governorate Tourism in Egypt Tourism in Israel Tourism in Jordan Wadi Sayq/Khor Kharfot References [ edit ] ^ "Limits of Oceans and Seas, 3rd edition" (PDF) . International Hydrographic Organization. 1953. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 October 2011 . Retrieved 28 December 2020 .

^ Klinger, Yann; Rivera, Luis; Haessler, Henri; Maurin, Jean-Christophe (August 1999).

"Active Faulting in the Gulf of Aqaba: New Knowledge from the Mw 7.3 Earthquake of 22 November 1995" (PDF) .

Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America .

89 (4).

Seismological Society of America : 1025– 1036.

Bibcode : 1999BuSSA..89.1025K .

doi : 10.1785/BSSA0890041025 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 January 2014 . Retrieved 23 February 2013 .

^ מדריך ישראל , סיני וחבל עזה, הוצאת כתר ו משרד הביטחון – ההוצאה לאור , 1979, עמ' 124–126, 165–157, 239-185 ^ Artificial Reefs and Dive Tourism in Eilat, Israel. Dan Wilhelmsson, Marcus C. Öhman, Henrik Ståhl and Yechiam Shlesinger. Ambio, Vol. 27, No. 8, Building Capacity for Coastal Management (Dec., 1998), pp. 764-766 Published by: Allen Press on behalf of Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences Wilhelmsson, Dan; Öhman, Marcus C.; Ståhl, Henrik; Shlesinger, Yechiam (1998). "Artificial Reefs and Dive Tourism in Eilat, Israel".

Ambio .

27 (8): 764– 766.

JSTOR 4314831 .

. the United Nations Environment Programme . Retrieved on 17 December. 2014 ^ Sciara di N.G., Smeenk C., Rudolph P., Addink M., Baldwin R., Cesario A., Costa M., Feingold D., Fumagalli M., Kerem D., Goffman O., Elasar M., Scheinin A., Hadar N.. 2014. Summary review of cetaceans of the Red Sea.

^ "Dugongs in the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden" .

unep.ch . Archived from the original on 28 January 2016.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gulf of Aqaba .

The Red Sea Marine Peace Park page on Israel's Ministry of Foreign Affairs – a joint Israel-Jordan initiative v t e Former Israeli settlements in the Sinai Peninsula Yamit region Avshalom Dikla Holit Netiv HaAsara Sufa relocated Talmei Yosef Yamit Pri'el Gulf of Aqaba Dizahav (Dahab) Neviot (Nuweiiba) Ofira (Sharm El Sheikh) Taba v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Israel Geographic Pleiades Other IdRef NARA Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gulf_of_Aqaba&oldid=1305024087 " Categories : Bodies of water of the Red Sea Gulfs of the Indian Ocean Bodies of water of Egypt Bodies of water of Israel Bodies of water of Jordan Gulfs of Saudi Arabia Aqaba Great Rift Valley South Sinai Governorate Jordan–Saudi Arabia border Israel–Jordan border Egypt–Israel border Gulfs of Asia Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Use dmy dates from January 2021 Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Articles using infobox body of water without alt Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map alt Articles using infobox body of water without image bathymetry All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 Pages using div col with small parameter Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 16:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gulf of Aqaba 89 languages Add topic

