Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Example relationships 3 Data structure diagram 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Conceptual schema 9 languages Català Deutsch فارسی Қазақша Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia High-level database design model This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Conceptual schema" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A conceptual schema or conceptual data model is a high-level description of informational needs underlying the design of a database .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It typically includes only the core concepts and the main relationships among them. This is a high-level model with insufficient detail to build a complete, functional database.

[ 3 ] It describes the structure of the whole database for a group of users. The conceptual model is also known as the data model that can be used to describe the conceptual schema when a database system is implemented.

[ citation needed ] It hides the internal details of physical storage and targets the description of entities, datatypes, relationships and constraints.

Overview [ edit ] A conceptual schema is a map of concepts and their relationships used for databases .  This describes the semantics of an organization and represents a series of assertions about its nature.  Specifically, it describes the things of significance to an organization ( entity classes ), about which it is inclined to collect information, and their characteristics ( attributes ) and the associations between pairs of those things of significance ( relationships ).

Because a conceptual schema represents the semantics of an organization, and not a database design , it may exist on various levels of abstraction.  The original ANSI four-schema architecture began with the set of external schemata that each represents one person's view of the world around him or her.  These are consolidated into a single conceptual schema that is the superset of all of those external views.  A data model can be as concrete as each person's perspective, but this tends to make it inflexible.  If that person's world changes, the model must change.  Conceptual data models take a more abstract perspective, identifying the fundamental things, of which the things an individual deals with are just examples.

The model does allow for what is called inheritance in object oriented terms.  The set of instances of an entity class may be subdivided into entity classes in their own right.  Thus, each instance of a sub-type entity class is also an instance of the entity class's super-type . Each instance of the super-type entity class, then is also an instance of one of the sub-type entity classes.

Super-type / sub-type relationships may be exclusive or not. A methodology may require that each instance of a super-type may only be an instance of one sub-type. Similarly, a super-type/sub-type relationship may be exhaustive or not. It is exhaustive if the methodology requires that each instance of a super-type must be an instance of a sub-type. A sub-type named "Other" is often necessary.

Example relationships [ edit ] Each PERSON may be the vendor in one or more ORDERS.

Each ORDER must be from one and only one PERSON.

PERSON is a sub-type of PARTY.  (Meaning that every instance of PERSON is also an instance of PARTY.) Each EMPLOYEE may have a supervisor who is also an EMPLOYEE.

Data structure diagram [ edit ] Data structure diagram and a data dictionary A data structure diagram (DSD) is a data model or diagram used to describe conceptual data models by providing graphical notations which document entities and their relationships, and the constraints that bind them.

See also [ edit ] Concept mapping – Diagram showing relationships among concepts Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Conceptual framework – Method of organizing information Conceptual graphs – Formalism for knowledge representation Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Conceptual model (computer science) – A model in software engineering Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Data modeling – Creating a model of the data in a system Entity-relationship model – Model or diagram describing interrelated things Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Object-relationship modelling – Programming technique Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Object-role modeling – Programming technique Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Knowledge representation – Field of artificial intelligence Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Logical data model Mindmap – Diagram to visually organize information Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Ontology – Specification of a conceptualization Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Physical data model – Representation of a data design Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Semantic Web – Extension of the Web to facilitate data exchange Three schema approach – Approach to building information systems Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets References [ edit ] ^ Osis, Janis; Donins, Uldis (20 June 2017).

Topological UML Modeling: An Improved Approach for Domain Modeling and Software Development . Elsevier Science.

ISBN 978-0-12-805476-5 .

^ Sherman, Rick (21 November 2014).

Business Intelligence Guidebook: From Data Integration to Analytics . Elsevier Science.

ISBN 978-0-12-411461-6 .

^ Tupper, Charles (2011).

Data Architecture: From Zen to Reality . Morgan Kaufmann.

ISBN 978-0-12-385126-0 .

Further reading [ edit ] Perez, Sandra K., & Anthony K. Sarris, eds. (1995) Technical Report for IRDS Conceptual Schema, Part 1: Conceptual Schema for IRDS, Part 2: Modeling Language Analysis, X3/TR-14:1995, American National Standards Institute, New York, NY.

Halpin T , Morgan T (2008) Information Modeling and Relational Databases, 2nd edn., San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.

External links [ edit ] A different point of view , as described by the agile community v t e Data model Main Architecture Modeling Structure Schemas Conceptual Logical Physical Types Database Data structure diagram Entity–relationship model ( enhanced ) Geographic Generic Semantic Common Related models Data-flow diagram Information model Object model Object–role modeling Unified Modeling Language See also Database design Business process modeling Core architecture data model Enterprise modelling Function model Process modeling XML schema Data Format Description Language Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conceptual_schema&oldid=1303149811 " Categories : Data modeling Conceptual modelling Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2014 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2020 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 10:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Conceptual schema 9 languages Add topic

