Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Etymology 3 Jurisdiction 4 Types and organization of courts Toggle Types and organization of courts subsection 4.1 Trial and appellate courts 4.2 Civil law courts and common law courts 4.3 International courts 4.4 List of types and organization of courts 5 Court television shows 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Court 109 languages Адыгэбзэ አማርኛ العربية ܐܪܡܝܐ Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaelg Galego Gĩkũyũ 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs मैथिली Македонски मराठी მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Mfantse Minangkabau မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Twi Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Judicial institution with authority to resolve legal disputes For other uses, see Court (disambiguation) .

The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with Western culture and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( December 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A trial at the Old Bailey in London as drawn by Thomas Rowlandson and Augustus Pugin for Microcosm of London (1808–11) The International Court of Justice A court is an institution , often a government entity, with the authority to adjudicate legal disputes between parties and administer justice in civil , criminal , and administrative matters in accordance with the rule of law .

Courts generally consist of judges or other judicial officers , and are usually established and dissolved through legislation enacted by a legislature . Courts may also be established by constitution or an equivalent constituting instrument.

The practical authority given to the court is known as its jurisdiction , which describes the court's power to decide certain kinds of questions, or petitions put to it. There are various kinds of courts, including trial courts , appellate courts , administrative courts , international courts , and tribunals .

Description [ edit ] A court is any person or institution , often as a government institution, with the authority to adjudicate legal disputes between parties and carry out the administration of justice in civil , criminal , and administrative matters in accordance with the rule of law .

[ 1 ] In both common law and civil law legal systems , courts are the central means for dispute resolution , and it is generally understood that all people have an ability to bring their claims before a court. Similarly, the rights of those accused of a crime include the right to present a defense before a court.

The system of courts that interprets and applies the law is collectively known as the judiciary . The place where a court sits is known as a venue . The room where court proceedings occur is known as a courtroom , and the building as a courthouse ; court facilities range from simple and very small facilities in rural communities to large complex facilities in urban communities.

The practical authority given to the court is known as its jurisdiction (from Latin iūrisdictiō , from iūris , "of the law ", + dīcō , "to declare", + -tiō , noun-forming suffix ), the court's power to decide certain kinds of questions or petitions put to it. According to William Blackstone 's Commentaries on the Laws of England , a court (for civil wrongs ) is constituted by a minimum of three parties: the āctor or plaintiff , who complains of an injury done; the reus or defendant , who is called upon to make satisfaction for it; and the jūdex or judicial power, who is to examine the truth of the fact, determine the law arising upon that fact, and, if any injury appears to have been done, ascertain and by its officers apply a legal remedy . It is also usual in the superior courts to have barristers, and attorneys or counsel, as assistants, [ 2 ] though, often, courts consist of additional barristers, bailiffs , reporters , and perhaps a jury .

Etymology [ edit ] The building of the Supreme Court of Estonia in Tartu The word court comes from the French cour , an enclosed yard, which derives from the Latin form cōrtem , the accusative case of cohors , which again means an enclosed yard or the occupants of such a yard. The English word court is thus a descendant of the Latin word hortus from Ancient Greek χόρτος ( khórtos ) (meaning "garden", hence horticulture and orchard), both referring to an enclosed space.

[ 3 ] The meaning of a judicial assembly is first attested in the 12th century, and derives from the earlier usage to designate a sovereign and his entourage, which met to adjudicate disputes in such an enclosed yard. The verb "to court", meaning to win favor, derives from the same source since people traveled to the sovereign's court to win his favor.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The term the court is used to refer to the presiding officer or officials, usually one or more judges . The judge or panel of judges may also be collectively referred to as "the bench " (in contrast to attorneys and barristers , collectively referred to as "the bar ").

[ 5 ] In the United States, the legal authority of a court to take action is based on personal jurisdiction over the parties to the litigation and subject-matter jurisdiction over the claims asserted.

The system of courts that interprets and applies the law is collectively known as the judiciary . The place where a court sits is known as a venue . The room where court proceedings occur is known as a courtroom , and the building as a courthouse ; court facilities range from simple and very small facilities in rural communities to large complex facilities in urban communities.

Jurisdiction [ edit ] The Court House of Kavala , Greece Main article: Jurisdiction The practical authority given to the court is known as its jurisdiction (from Latin iūrisdictiō , from iūris , "of the law ", + dīcō , "to declare", + -tiō , noun-forming suffix ), the court's power to decide certain kinds of questions or petitions put to it. According to William Blackstone 's Commentaries on the Laws of England , a court (for civil wrongs ) is constituted by a minimum of three parties: the āctor or plaintiff , who complains of an injury done; the reus or defendant , who is called upon to make satisfaction for it; and the jūdex or judicial power, who is to examine the truth of the fact, determine the law arising upon that fact, and, if any injury appears to have been done, ascertain and by its officers apply a legal remedy . It is also usual in the superior courts to have barristers, and attorneys or counsel, as assistants, [ 2 ] though, often, courts consist of additional barristers, bailiffs , reporters , and perhaps a jury .

Jurisdiction is defined as the official authority to make legal decisions and judgements over a person or material item within a territory.

[ 6 ] "Whether a given court has jurisdiction to preside over a given case" is a key question in any legal action.

[ 7 ] Three basic components of jurisdiction are personal jurisdiction over an individual or thing ( rēs ), jurisdiction over the particular subject matter ( subject-matter jurisdiction ) and territorial jurisdiction .

[ 7 ] Jurisdiction over a person refers to the full authority over a person regardless of where they live, jurisdiction over a particular subject matter refers to the authority over the said subject of legal cases involved in a case, and lastly territorial jurisdiction is the authority over a person within an x amount of space.

Other concepts of jurisdiction include general , exclusive , appellate , and (in the United States federal courts ) diversity jurisdiction .

[ 7 ] Types and organization of courts [ edit ] Courts may be organized into a hierarchy of courts and have specific jurisdiction and include specialized courts .

Trial and appellate courts [ edit ] A courtroom of the Supreme Administrative Court of Finland Trial courts are courts that hold trials . Sometimes termed "courts of first instance", trial courts have varying original jurisdiction . Trial courts may conduct trials with juries as the finders of fact (these are known as jury trials ) or trials in which judges act as both finders of fact and finders of law (in some jurisdictions these are known as bench trials ). Juries are less common in court systems outside the Anglo-American common law tradition.

Appellate courts are courts that hear appeals of lower courts and trial courts.

Some courts, such as the Crown Court in England and Wales, may have both trial and appellate jurisdictions.

Civil law courts and common law courts [ edit ] The two major legal traditions of the western world are the civil law courts and the common law courts. These two great legal traditions are similar, in that they are products of western culture, although there are significant differences between the two traditions. Civil law courts are profoundly based upon Roman law , specifically a civil body of law entitled Corpus Juris Civilis .

[ 8 ] This theory of civil law was rediscovered around the end of the eleventh century and became a foundation for university legal education starting in Bologna, Italy and subsequently being taught throughout continental European universities.

[ 8 ] Civil law is firmly ensconced in the French and German legal systems . Common law courts were established by English royal judges of the King's Council after the Norman Invasion of Britain in 1066.

[ 9 ] The royal judges created a body of law by combining local customs they were made aware of through traveling and visiting local jurisdictions.

[ 9 ] This common standard of law became known as "Common Law". This legal tradition is practiced in the English and American legal systems . In most civil law jurisdictions, courts function under an inquisitorial system . In the common law system, most courts follow the adversarial system .

Procedural law governs the rules by which courts operate: civil procedure for private disputes (for example); and criminal procedure for violation of the criminal law. In recent years, international courts are being created to resolve matters not covered by the jurisdiction of national courts. For example, the International Criminal Court , based in The Hague , in the Netherlands, or the Court of Permanent Lok Adalat (Public Utility Services), based in India.

International courts [ edit ] A courtroom of the Permanent Court of Arbitration of the United Nations .

International judicial institution International Court of Justice International Criminal Court International Court of Arbitration List of types and organization of courts [ edit ] Administrative court Admiralty court Appellate court Circuit court City court Constitutional court Commercial court Community court Court of cassation Court of marine inquiry Court of record Court-martial District court Domestic violence court Drug court DWI court Ecclesiastical court Equity court Extraordinary court Family court Girl's court High court International court Juvenile court Labor court Land court Livability court Lower court Mental health court Ordinary court Patent court Probate court Small claims court Specialized court Superior court Supreme court Tax court Teen court Trial court Veterans' court Court television shows [ edit ] Television show courts, which are often not part of the judicial system and are generally private arbitrators , are depicted within the court show genre; however, the courts depicted have been criticized as misrepresenting real-life courts of law and the true nature of the legal system.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Notable court shows include: Caso Cerrado Eye for an Eye Judge Alex Judge Joe Brown Judge Judy Judge Mathis Judge Rinder Paternity Court The People's Court See also [ edit ] Kangaroo court Sentencing disparity References [ edit ] ^ Walker, David (1980).

The Oxford Companion to Law . Oxford: Oxford University Press . p.

301 .

ISBN 0-19-866110-X .

^ a b "Blackstone's Commentaries on the Laws of England – Book the Third – Chapter the Third : Of Courts in General" .

Avalon Project . Retrieved 23 December 2017 .

^ a b Harper, Douglas.

"court (n.)" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved 21 May 2015 .

^ "COUR : Etymologie de COUR" .

Cnrtl.fr . Retrieved 23 December 2017 .

^ See generally 28 U.S.C.

§ 1 : "The Supreme Court of the United States shall consist of a Chief Justice of the United States and eight associate justices [ . . . ]" (italics added); 28 U.S.C.

§ 43(b) : "Each court of appeals shall consist of the circuit judges of the circuit in regular active service." (italics added); 28 U.S.C.

§ 132(b) (in part): "Each district court shall consist of the district judge or judges for the district in regular active service." (italics added); 28 U.S.C.

§ 151 (in part): "In each judicial district, the bankruptcy judges in regular active service shall constitute a unit of the district court to be known as the bankruptcy court for that district [ . . . ]" (italics added).

^ "Jurisdiction" .

Civil Procedure . Retrieved 23 December 2017 .

^ a b c Jurisdiction , Legal Information Institute , Cornell Law School.

^ a b von Mehren, Arthur T.; Murray, Peter L. (8 January 2007).

Law in the United States . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9781139462198 . Retrieved 21 May 2015 .

^ a b Burnham, William (2006).

Introduction to the Law and Legal System of the United States (4th ed.). St. Paul (Minn.): Thomson-West.

ISBN 9780314158987 .

^ Neubauer, David W.; Meinhold, Stephen S. (13 January 2012).

Judicial Process: Law, Courts, and Politics in the United States – David W. Neubauer, Stephen S. Meinhold . Cengage Learning.

ISBN 978-1111357566 . Retrieved 24 June 2013 .

^ Wolfson, Andrew.

" 'Deadbeat' derided for mixing reality TV, court" .

The Courier-Journal . Retrieved 18 September 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Court ".

Media related to Courts at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to Courts at Wikiquote v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National Germany 2 United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Korea Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐kdswv
Cached time: 20250814214838
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.523 seconds
Real time usage: 0.662 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3193/1000000
Revision size: 16700/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 71007/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3099/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 54871/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.334/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14377919/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  543.040      1 -total
 22.92%  124.479      1 Template:Reflist
 16.63%   90.317     22 Template:Lang
 15.36%   83.387      1 Template:Law
 15.12%   82.090      1 Template:Navbox
 14.66%   79.635      4 Template:Cite_book
 11.44%   62.104      1 Template:Short_description
  7.84%   42.571      1 Template:Authority_control
  7.53%   40.886      1 Template:Globalize
  7.52%   40.820      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:75358:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814214838 and revision id 1301934579. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Court&oldid=1301934579 " Category : Courts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from December 2016 Western culture-centric Use dmy dates from May 2024 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 13:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Court 109 languages Add topic

