Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Biological affinities 3 Paleoenvironmental significance 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Diskagma 4 languages Deutsch Español Magyar Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Diskagma buttonii ) Genus of problematic fossil Diskagma Temporal range: Paleoproterozoic , 2200 Ma Pha.

Proterozoic Archean Had.

↓ Diskagma buttonii holotype, in thin section of 2200 million year old Waterval Onder paleosol, South Africa Scientific classification Domain: Eukaryota Kingdom: incertae sedis Genus: Diskagma Retallack (2013) Type species Diskagma buttonii Retallack (2013) Diskagma ("disc-like fragment") is a genus of problematic fossil from a Paleoproterozoic (2200 million years old) paleosol from South Africa , and significant as one of the oldest likely eukaryotes and some of the earliest evidence for life on land.

[ 1 ] Reconstruction of Diskagma buttonii .

Description [ edit ] Diskagma buttonii is a small fossil less than 1mm in length found within the surface horizon of a vertisol paleosol above the Hekpoort Basalt dated to 2200 million years old. The opacity of the matrix and the size of the fossil meant that its three dimensional structure required imaging by computer-assisted x-ray tomography using a cyclotron source [ 1 ] The fossils are shaped like an urn with an apical cup, which is filled with filamentous structures whose exact nature is uncertain due to recrystallization of the matrix under greenschist facies metamorphism. The base of these hollow urns is a system of hollow tubes running over the paleosol and connecting the urns into groups. The walls of Diskagma have scattered spiny or tubular extensions.

Poorly preserved filamentous structures in the apex of Diskagma buttonii .

Biological affinities [ edit ] 3D reconstruction of Diskagma buttonii Diskagma buttonii is a problematic fossil that has been named before its biological affinities have been understood. Its size and complexity suggest that it had the degree of cytoskeletal complexity found in eukaryotes , but it predates the other fossil candidate for the oldest eukaryote Grypania , now known to be 1800 million years old, [ 2 ] and at 2200 million years old is much older than molecular clock estimates for eukaryotes of 1600 million years.

[ 3 ] Another similar fossil is Horodyskia . The size and hollow shape of Diskagma are similar to the living fungus Geosiphon , which is endosymbiotic with the cyanobacterium Nostoc . However, the apical cup and filaments are not seen in modern Geosiphon .

Paleoenvironmental significance [ edit ] Diskagma buttonii dates to the Paleoproterozoic Great Oxygenation Event , a time of marked increase in atmospheric oxygenation compared with that of the Archean.

[ 4 ] If, like the living Geosiphon , the central cavity of Diskagma housed a photosymbiont , it may have contributed to atmospheric oxygenation.

Although Precambrian landscapes are customarily regarded as barren as the surface of Mars , Diskagma is evidence for very early life on land. Furthermore, at 2200 million years old, Diskagma was larger than coeval marine microbes of the Gunflint Chert , and more complex than stromatolites .

References [ edit ] ^ a b Retallack, G.J.; Krull, E.S.; Thackray, G.D.; Parkinson, D. (2013). "Problematic urn-shaped fossils from a Paleoproterozoic (2.2 Ga) paleosol in South Africa".

Precambrian Research .

235 : 71– 87.

Bibcode : 2013PreR..235...71R .

doi : 10.1016/j.precamres.2013.05.015 .

^ Schneider, D.A.; Bickford, M.E.; Cannon, W.F.; Schulz, K.J.; Hamilton, M.A. (2002). "Age of volcanic rocks and syndepositional iron formations, Marquette Range Supergroup: implications for the tectonic setting of Paleoproterozoic iron formations of the Lake Superior region".

Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences .

39 (6): 999– 1012.

Bibcode : 2002CaJES..39..999S .

doi : 10.1139/e02-016 .

^ Hedges, S.B.; Kumar, S. (2009).

The time tree of life . Oxford University Press, New York.

^ Murakami, T.; Sreenivas, B.; Sharma, S.D.; and Sugimori, H. (2011). "Quantification of atmospheric oxygen levels during the Paleoproterozoic using paleosol compositions and iron oxidation kinetics".

Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta .

75 (14): 3982– 4004.

Bibcode : 2011GeCoA..75.3982M .

doi : 10.1016/j.gca.2011.04.023 .

External links [ edit ] news coverage Geosiphon at Index Fungorum The Geosiphon pyriformis symbiosis - fungus 'eats' cyanobacterium Schuessler lab Glomeromycota phylogeny v t e Eukaryote classification Domain Archaea Bacteria Eukaryota (major groups Metamonada Discoba Diaphoretickes Hacrobia Cryptista Rhizaria Alveolata Stramenopiles Plants Amorphea Amoebozoa Opisthokonta Animals Fungi Mesomycetozoea ) Amorphea Amoebozoa Discosea Tubulinea Variosea Archamoebea Cutosea Eumycetozoa (true slime molds) Obazoa Apusomonadida Breviatea Opisthokonta Holomycota Rotosphaerida Fungi ¹ Holozoa Tunicaraptor † Bicellum Ichthyosporea Pluriformea Filozoa Filasterea Choanozoa Choanoflagellata Animalia (animals) ¹ Diaphoretickes Telonemia Haptista Centroplasthelida Haptophytina SAR Rhizaria Cercozoa Endomyxa Retaria Foraminifera Radiolaria * Alveolata Colponemida * Ciliophora (ciliates) Myzozoa Apicomplexa Chrompodellida Dinoflagellata Perkinsozoa Stramenopiles Platysulcus Kaonashia Bigyra * Bicosoecida Placidozoa Sagenista Gyrista Developea Pirsoniales Hyphochytriomycetes Ochrophyta (brown algae, diatoms and relatives) Oomycetes (water molds) Actinophryida CAM Pancryptista Microheliella Cryptista Palpitomonas Katablepharidida Cryptomonada Archaeplastida ( plants sensu lato ) Picozoa Rhodophyta (red algae) Rhodelphidia Glaucophyta Viridiplantae (green plants or plants sensu stricto ) Prasinodermophyta Chlorophyta Streptophyta Mesostigmatophyceae Chlorokybophyceae Spirotaenia Klebsormidiophyceae Charophyceae Coleochaetophyceae Zygnematophyceae Embryophyta (land plants or plants sensu strictissimo ) ¹ " Excavates "* Discoba Jakobea Tsukubamonas Discicristata Heterolobosea Euglenozoa Metamonada * Anaeramoebidae Parabasalia Barthelona Skoliomonas Fornicata Preaxostyla Malawimonadida Malawimonadidae Imasidae Incertae sedis Provora Nebulidia Nibbleridia Hemimastigophora Spironematellidae Paramastigidae Ancyromonadida Ancyromonadidae Planomonadidae Divimonas CRuMs Diphylleida Mantamonadida Rigifilida Glissandrida Genera of uncertain affiliation Acinetactis Actinastrum Berkeleyaesol Kamera Magosphaera Meringosphaera Meteora Parakaryon (?) Quasibodo Tetrahelia Acritarchs and other fossils † Algospongia † Archaeochaeta † Cephalonyx † Changchengia † Cheleutochroa † Chitinozoa † Coryphidium † Cucumiforma † Dictyosphaera † Diskagma (?) † Eosolena † Francevillian biota (?) † Germinosphaera † Grandilingulata † Granomarginata † Grypania † Gunflint microbiota † Horodyskia † Introvertocystis † Korilophyton † Leiosphaeridia † Navifusa † Portalites † Protosterol biota † Pterospermopsimorpha † Qingshania † Quadrisporites † Schizofusa † Shuiyousphaeridium † Simia † Tappania † Tawuia (?) † Tetraporina † Thuchomyces (?) † Tuanshanzia † Valeria † Vernanimalcula ¹non- protist groups *possibly paraphyletic groups bold denotes groups with over 1,000 species Taxonomy of protists Taxon identifiers Diskagma buttonii Wikidata : Q16981390 IFPNI : 2848DD55-07CE-442C-8ADD-7AAD41F8E2DF Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Diskagma&oldid=1300341766 " Categories : Monotypic eukaryote genera Paleoproterozoic Controversial taxa Proterozoic life Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 19:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Diskagma 4 languages Add topic

