Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 First four ecumenical councils (4th–5th centuries) Toggle First four ecumenical councils (4th–5th centuries) subsection 1.1 First Council of Nicaea 1.2 First Council of Constantinople 1.3 Council of Ephesus 1.4 Council of Chalcedon 2 Councils of the 6th to 9th centuries Toggle Councils of the 6th to 9th centuries subsection 2.1 Second Council of Constantinople 2.2 Third Council of Constantinople 2.3 Second Council of Nicaea 2.4 Fourth Council of Constantinople 3 Councils of the High Middle Ages (12th–14th centuries) Toggle Councils of the High Middle Ages (12th–14th centuries) subsection 3.1 First Council of the Lateran 3.2 Second Council of the Lateran 3.3 Third Council of the Lateran 3.4 Fourth Council of the Lateran 3.5 First Council of Lyon 3.6 Second Council of Lyon 3.7 Council of Vienne 4 Reform Councils (15th–16th centuries) Toggle Reform Councils (15th–16th centuries) subsection 4.1 Council of Constance 4.2 Council of Basel-Ferrara-Florence 4.3 Fifth Council of the Lateran 4.4 Council of Trent 5 Councils of the 19th and 20th centuries Toggle Councils of the 19th and 20th centuries subsection 5.1 First Vatican Council 5.2 Second Vatican Council 6 Canon law concerning ecumenical councils 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Catholic ecumenical councils 7 languages العربية Eesti Español Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Português Simple English Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ecumenical council recognized by the Catholic Church Part of a series on the Ecumenical councils of the Catholic Church Renaissance depiction of the Council of Trent 4th–5th centuries Nicaea I (325) Constantinople I (381) Ephesus (431) Chalcedon (451) 6th–9th centuries Constantinople II (553) Constantinople III (680–681) Nicaea II (787) Constantinople IV (869–870) 12th–14th centuries Lateran I (1123) Lateran II (1139) Lateran III (1179) Lateran IV (1215) Lyon I (1245) Lyon II (1274) Vienne (1311–1312) 15th–16th centuries Constance (1414–1418) Basel-Ferrara-Florence (1431–1445) Lateran V (1512–1517) Trent (1545–1563) 19th–20th centuries Vatican I (1869–1870) Vatican II (1962–1965) Catholic Church portal v t e Part of a series on the Catholic Church St. Peter's Basilica , Vatican City Overview Pope : Leo XIV Hierarchy History ( timeline ) Theology Liturgy Sacraments Mary Background Jesus Christ Crucifixion Resurrection Ascension Early Christianity Peter Paul Fathers History of the Catholic Church History of the papacy Ecumenical councils Magisterium Four Marks of the Church One true church Apostolic succession Organisation Holy See Roman Curia College of Cardinals Ecumenical councils Episcopal polity Latin Church Eastern Churches Canon law Theologies Doctrine God Trinity Father Son Holy Ghost Consubstantialitas Filioque Divinum illud munus Divine law Decalogus Ex Cathedra Deificatio Realms beyond the States of the Church Heaven Purgatory Limbo Hell Paschal mystery Passion of Jesus Crucifixion of Jesus Harrowing of Hell Resurrection of Jesus Ascension of Jesus Blessed Virgin Mary Mariology Veneration Immaculate Conception Mater Dei Perpetual virginity Assumption Dormition Titles Queen Apparition Mediatrix Salvation Baptism of desire Baptism of blood Divine grace Outside the Church there is no salvation Infused righteousness Invincible ignorance Justification Means of grace Merit Mortal sin Satisfaction Moral influence Sanctification Synergism Venial sin Ecclesiology College of Bishops Deposit of faith Infallibility of the Church Mystical Body of Christ Papal primacy People of God Perfect community Subsistit in Other teachings Josephology Morality Body Sexuality Apologetics Amillennialism Original sin Hypostatic union Predestination Seven deadly sins Beatific vision Saints Dogma Texts Bible Old Testament New Testament Official Bible Vulgate Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Peshitta Apostles' Creed Nicene Creed Athanasian Creed Catechism of the Catholic Church Papal bull Apostolic exhortation Epistula Encyclica Philosophy Cardinal virtues Just war Natural law Catholic ethics Personalism Probabilism Social teaching Philosophy of canon law Philosophers Virtue ethics Schools Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Christian humanism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Traditionalist Catholicism Sedevacantism Worship Liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Mass Divine Liturgy Holy Qurbana Holy Qurobo Liturgy of the Hours Liturgical year Sacraments Baptism Penance Eucharist Confirmation Anointing of the Sick Matrimony Holy orders Prayer Devotions Bible Biblical canon Rites Latin liturgy : Roman Post-Vatican II Tridentine Use of Sarum Anglican Use Zaire Use Gallican Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Eastern Catholic liturgy : Alexandrian Antiochene West Syriac Malankara East Syriac Armenian Byzantine Miscellaneous Antipopes Anti-Catholicism Criticism Deism / Pandeism Ecumenism Monasticism Relations with: Islam Judaism ( Zionism ) Orthodoxy Protestantism Societal issues Art Evolution Health care HIV/AIDS Homosexuality Sexual abuse Music Nazi Germany Politics ( in the United States ) Role in civilization Science Sex and gender roles Slavery the Age of Discovery Links and resources Index Outline Glossary Category Media Templates WikiProject Vatican City portal Catholic Church portal v t e A session of the Council of Trent, from an engraving According to the Catholic Church , a Church Council is ecumenical ("world-wide") if it is "a solemn congregation of the Catholic bishops of the world at the invitation of the Pope to decide on matters of the Church with him".

[ 1 ] The wider term " ecumenical council " relates to Church councils recognised by both Eastern and Western Christianity .

In Catholicism, in addition to ecumenical Councils, there are "particular Councils". Current Canon Law recognises two kinds of particular Councils: plenary councils involve the bishops of an episcopal conference (usually a single country), [ 2 ] while provincial councils involve the bishops of an ecclesiastical province .

[ 3 ] The Catholic Church recognizes as ecumenical 21 councils occurring over a period of some 1900 years.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The ecumenical nature of some Councils was disputed for some time but was eventually accepted, for example the First Lateran Council and the Council of Basel . A 1539 book on ecumenical councils by Cardinal Dominicus Jacobazzi excluded them, as did other scholars.

[ 6 ] The first few centuries did not know large-scale councils; they were feasible only after Emperor Constantine granted the Church freedom from persecution. As a result, the Council of Jerusalem or Apostolic Council, held in Jerusalem around AD 50 and described in Acts of the Apostles chapter 15, is not an ecumenical Council, even though most Christian denominations consider that it expresses a key part of Christian doctrine and moral teaching.

First four ecumenical councils (4th–5th centuries) [ edit ] These comprised the hierarchs of the undivided Church (i.e. both East and West), and are accepted as authoritative, not only by Catholics, but also by the Eastern Orthodox Church and many Protestant denominations.

First Council of Nicaea [ edit ] Main article: First Council of Nicaea The First Council of Nicaea (20 May – 25 July? 325) formulated the original Nicene Creed . Most importantly, the council defined the equality of God the Father and Christ, his son. It taught that Jesus was of the same substance as God the Father and not just merely similar.

[ 7 ] By defining the nature of the divinity of Jesus, the council did not solely rely on the Bible but jointly gave it a binding interpretation. The council issued 20 canons [ 7 ] and repudiated Arianism .

First Council of Constantinople [ edit ] Main article: First Council of Constantinople Early manuscript illustration of I Constantinople Homilies of Gregory Nazianzus , Bibliothèque nationale de France (879-882) The First Council of Constantinople defined in four canons the Nicene Creed , which is still used in the Catholic Church. Most importantly, it defined the divinity of the Holy Spirit . The council met from May until July 381 during the pontificate of Pope Damasus I and issued four canons.

Council of Ephesus [ edit ] Main article: First Council of Ephesus The Council of Ephesus proclaimed the Virgin Mary as the Theotokos (Greek Η Θεοτόκος, "Mother of God" or "God-bearer"). The council met in seven sessions during the pontificate of Pope Celestine I from 22 June until 17 July 431. It rejected Nestorianism .

Council of Chalcedon [ edit ] Main article: Council of Chalcedon The Council of Chalcedon defined the two natures (divine and human) of Jesus Christ. "We teach unanimously that the one son, our lord Jesus Christ to be fully God and fully human." [ 8 ] It met in 17 sessions from 8 October until November 451 during the pontificate of Pope Leo the Great. It issued 28 canons, the last one defining equality of the bishops of Rome and Constantinople, which was rejected by the papal delegates and Pope Leo the Great .

[ 8 ] Councils of the 6th to 9th centuries [ edit ] Second Council of Constantinople [ edit ] Main article: Second Council of Constantinople The council again dealt with the issue of the two natures of Christ, as monophysitism had spread through Christianity despite the decisions of Chalcedon. The council met from 5 May until 2 June 553, in eight sessions during the pontificate of Pope Vigilius , who was imprisoned during the council by the emperor.

[ 9 ] It condemned "Three Chapters" of Nestorian writings. Several Catholic provinces refused to accept the Second Council of Constantinople because of the political pressures.

[ 9 ] Third Council of Constantinople [ edit ] Main article: Third Council of Constantinople The council repudiated Monothelitism , and reaffirmed that Christ, being both human and divine, had both human and divine wills. It met in sixteen sessions from 7 November 680, until 16 September 681. The council was held during the pontificates of Pope Agatho and Pope Leo II . It also condemned Honorius for holding to Monothelitism.

[ 10 ] Second Council of Nicaea [ edit ] Main article: Second Council of Nicaea In 730, the emperor outlawed pictorial presentations of Christ and the saints. The Pope argued against the first iconoclasm and convened in 731 a local council in Rome to no avail.

[ 11 ] The Second Council of Nicaea discussed and restored the veneration of icons using the Bible and tradition of the Church as arguments. Pictures of Christ, the Blessed Virgin Mary and the Saints were used to stimulate piety and imitation. The council met in eight sessions from 24 September until 23 October 787, during the pontificate of Pope Adrian I . It issued twenty canons.

[ 11 ] This was the last ecumenical council to be accepted by both Eastern and Western churches.

Fourth Council of Constantinople [ edit ] Main article: Fourth Council of Constantinople (Catholic) With the coronation of Charlemagne by Pope Leo III in 800, his new title as Patricius Romanorum, and the handing over of the keys to the Tomb of Saint Peter , the papacy had acquired a new protector in the West. This freed the pontiffs to some degree from the power of the emperor in Constantinople, but it also led to a schism , because the emperors and patriarchs of Constantinople interpreted themselves as the true descendants of the Roman Empire dating back to the beginnings of the Church.

[ 12 ] Pope Nicholas I had refused to recognize Patriarch Photios I of Constantinople , who in turn had attacked the pope as a heretic, because he kept the filioque in the creed, which referred to the Holy Spirit proceeding from God the Father and the Son. The council condemned Photius, who questioned the legality of the papal delegates presiding over the council, and ended the schism.

[ 13 ] The council met in ten sessions from October 869 to February 870 and issued 27 canons.

Councils of the High Middle Ages (12th–14th centuries) [ edit ] All of these councils took place in the West and were attended by Western bishops.

First Council of the Lateran [ edit ] Main article: First Council of the Lateran Successors of Charlemagne insisted increasingly on the right to appoint bishops on their own, which led to the Investiture Controversy with the popes. The Concordat of Worms signed by Pope Calixtus II included a compromise between the two parties, by which the pope alone appoints bishops as spiritual head while the emperor maintains a right to give secular offices and honors. Pope Calixtus invoked the council to ratify this historic agreement.

[ 14 ] There are few documents and protocols left from the sessions and 25 canons approved. The council met from 18 March to 5 April 1123.

Second Council of the Lateran [ edit ] Main article: Second Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent II After the death of Pope Honorius II (1124–1130), two popes were elected by two groups of cardinals. Sixteen cardinals elected Pope Innocent II , while others elected antipope Anacletus II who was called the Pope of the Ghetto, in light of his Jewish origins.

[ 15 ] The council deposed the antipope and his followers. In important decisions regarding the celibacy of Catholic priests, clerical marriages of priests and monks, which up to 1139 were considered illegal, were defined and declared as non-existing and invalid. The council met under Pope Innocent II in April 1139 and issued 30 canons.

Third Council of the Lateran [ edit ] Main article: Third Council of the Lateran The council established the two-thirds majority necessary for the election of a pope. This two-thirds majority existed until Pope John Paul II. His change was reverted to the old two-thirds majority by Pope Benedict XVI in his Moto Proprio, De Aliquibus Mutationibus, from June 11, 2007. Still valid today are the regulations that outlawed simony , and the elevation to Episcopal offices for anyone under thirty. The council also ruled it illegal to sell arms or goods which could assist armaments to Muslim powers.

Saracens and Jews were forbidden from keeping Christian slaves.

[ 16 ] All cathedrals were to appoint teachers for indigent and low-income children.

Catharism was condemned as a heresy . This council is well documented: Reports include the saga of an Irish bishop whose income consisted in the milk from three cows. If one of the cows would stop giving milk, the faithful were obliged to donate another animal.

[ 17 ] The council met in March 1179 in three sessions and issued 27 chapters, which were all approved by Pope Alexander III .

Fourth Council of the Lateran [ edit ] Main article: Fourth Council of the Lateran The council mandated every Christian in serious sin is to go at least once a year on Easter to confession and to receive the Holy Eucharist . The council formally repeated Catholic teaching, that Christ is present in the Eucharist and thus clarified transubstantiation . It dealt with several heresies without naming names but intended to include the Catharists and several individual Catholic theologians. It made several political rulings as well.

[ 18 ] It met in only three sessions in November 1215 under Pope Innocent III and issued 70 chapters.

First Council of Lyon [ edit ] Main article: First Council of Lyon The council continued the political rulings of the previous council by deposing Frederick II , as German king and as emperor. Frederick was accused of heresy, treason and arresting a ship with about 100 prelates willing to attend a meeting with the pope. Frederick outlawed attendance at the council and blocked access to Lyon from Germany. Therefore, the majority of council fathers originated from Spain, France and Italy. The council met in three sessions from 28 June 1245, and issued 22 chapters all approved by Pope Innocent IV .

Second Council of Lyon [ edit ] Main article: Second Council of Lyon Pope Gregory X defined three aims for the council: aid to Jerusalem, union with the Greek Orthodox Church and reform of the Catholic Church. The council achieved a short-lived unity with the Greek representatives, who were denounced for this back home by the hierarchy and the emperor. A teaching on purgatory was defined.

Papal conclaves were regulated in Ubi periculum , which specified that electors must be locked up during the conclave and, if they could not agree on a pope after eight days, would receive water and bread only.

Franciscan , Dominican , and other orders had become controversial in light of their increasing popularity. The council confirmed their privileges.

Pope Gregory X approved all 31 chapters, after modifying some of them, thus clearly indicating papal prerogatives. The council met in six sessions from 7 May to 17 July 1274, under his leadership.

Council of Vienne [ edit ] Main article: Council of Vienne Bishops debating with the pope at the Council of Constance Pope Clement V solemnly opened the council with a liturgy , which has been repeated since in all Catholic ecumenical councils. He entered the Cathedral in liturgical vestments with a small procession and took his place on the papal throne . Patriarchs, followed by cardinals, archbishops and bishops, were the next in rank. The Pope gave a blessing to the choir, which intoned the Veni Sancte Spiritus .

[ 19 ] The Pope issued a prayer to the Holy Spirit, the litany of saints was recited and only after additional prayer did the Pope actually address the council and open it formally. He mentioned four topics, the Order of Knights Templar , the regaining of the Holy Land , a reform of public morality and freedom for the Church. Pope Clement had asked the bishops to list all their problems with the order. The Templars had become an obstacle to many bishops because they could act independently of them in such vital areas as filling parishes and other positions. Many accusations against the order were not accepted as the Pope ruled that confessions under torture were inadmissible. He withdrew canonical support for the order but refused to turn over its properties to the French king.

[ 20 ] The council fathers discussed another crusade , but were convinced instead by Raimundus Lullus that knowledge of foreign languages is the only way to Christianize Muslims and Jews . He successfully proposed the teaching of Greek , Hebrew , and Arabic languages in Catholic universities.

[ 21 ] With this the council is considered to have begun modern missionary policies. In the three sessions, the council discussed further Franciscan poverty ideals. It met from October 1311 until May 1312.

Reform Councils (15th–16th centuries) [ edit ] Main article: Conciliarism Tomb of antipope John XXIII.

All of these councils were called to reform the Church. The first three were involved in an ongoing debate about the alleged superiority of an ecumenical council over the pope.

Council of Constance [ edit ] Main article: Council of Constance Before the council there was the Western Schism , with three popes each claiming legitimacy. One of them, John XXIII , called for the council to take place in Constance (Konstanz), Germany, hoping it would secure him additional legitimacy. When opinion in the council moved against him in March 1415, he fled to Schaffhausen [ 22 ] and went into hiding in several Black Forest villages such as Saig.

After his flight, the council issued the famous declaration Haec sancta synodus , which declared that popes are below, not above, an ecumenical council. The council deposed all three popes and installed Pope Martin V , [ 23 ] who made his peace with John XXIII by installing him as a cardinal. It also provided for future councils to be held, and signed five concordats with the major participating nations .

Reforms did not materialize as hoped for, because the reformers disagreed among themselves.

John Hus , a Bohemian reformer, was issued an imperial guarantee for safe conduct to and from the council. However, after he contravened the agreement by saying Mass and preaching in public, he was arrested, tried for heresy, and burned at the stake by the civil authorities in 1415.

[ 24 ] The Council of Constance was one of the longest in Church history, meeting in 45 sessions from 4 November 1414 until 22 April 1418. The influx of 15,000 to 20,000 persons into the medieval city of 10,000 created dramatic monetary inflation: the German poet Oswald von Wolkenstein wrote, "Just thinking of Constance, my purse begins to hurt." [ 24 ] Painting of Jan Hus in the Council of Constance by Václav Brožík Council of Basel-Ferrara-Florence [ edit ] Main article: Council of Florence The council continued debate on conciliarism. The papal delegate opened the council in Basel on 23 July 1431, without a single bishop present. When he tried to close it later, bishops insisted on citing the pope to the council, which he refused. The council continued on its own and issued several decrees on Church reform. Most of the participants were theologians; bishops made only ten percent of the eligible voters. The Pope moved the council to Ferrara , where he achieved a major success, when the Greek Orthodox Church agreed to unity with Rome. But conciliarism continued to be the politically correct trend, as "reform" and "council" were seen as inseparable.

[ 25 ] Formally, the Council of Basel was never closed. The council decreed in 1439 (a short-lived) union with Greek, Armenian, and Jacobite Churches (1442). The council had 25 sessions from July 1431 until April 1442. It met under Pope Eugene IV in Basel, Germany, and Ferrara and Florence, Italy. It was moved to Rome in 1442.

Fifth Council of the Lateran [ edit ] Main article: Fifth Council of the Lateran The Fifth Council of the Lateran opened under the leadership of the Pope in Rome. It taught that the soul of a human being lives forever (but see the current understanding of eternal life [ 26 ] ). As previous councils, it condemned heresies stating the opposite without mentioning names. The opening sermon included the sentence: "People must be transformed by holiness not holiness by the people ." [ 27 ] The issue was reform and numerous small reforms were approved by the council, such as selection of bishops, taxation issues, religious education, training of priests, improved sermons, etc., but the larger issues were not covered and Pope Leo X was not particularly reform-minded. The council condemned as illegal a previous meeting in Pisa.

[ 27 ] The council met from 1512–1517 in twelve sessions under Pope Julius II and his successor Pope Leo X.

[ 27 ] This was the first council to have a representative from the New World, Alessandro Geraldini , the Archbishop of Santo Domingo , attend.

[ 28 ] Council of Trent [ edit ] Main article: Council of Trent Pope Paul III convoked the Council of Trent The council issued condemnations on what it defined as Protestant heresies and it defined Church teachings in the areas of Scripture and Tradition, Original Sin , Justification , Sacraments, the Eucharist in Holy Mass and the veneration of saints . It issued numerous reform decrees.

[ 29 ] By specifying Catholic doctrine on salvation , the sacraments , and the Biblical canon , the council was answering Protestant disputes.

[ 30 ] The council entrusted to the pope the implementation of its work, as a result of which Pope Pius V issued in 1566 the Roman Catechism , in 1568 a revised Roman Breviary , and in 1570 a revised Roman Missal , thus initiating the Tridentine Mass (from Trent's Latin name Tridentum ), and Pope Clement VIII issued in 1592 a revised edition of the Vulgate .

The Council of Trent is considered one of the most successful councils in the history of the Catholic Church, firming up Catholic belief as understood at the time. It convened in Trent between 13 December 1545, and 5 December 1563, in twenty-five sessions for three periods. Council fathers met for the 1st–8th sessions in Trent (1545–1547) and for the 9th–11th sessions in Bologna (1547) during the pontificate of Pope Paul III .

[ 29 ] Under Pope Julius III , the council met in Trent (1551–1552) for the 12th–16th sessions. Under Pope Pius IV the 17th–25th sessions took place in Trent (1559–1565).

Councils of the 19th and 20th centuries [ edit ] First Vatican Council [ edit ] Main article: First Vatican Council The council, also known as Vatican I, was convened by Pope Pius IX in 1869 and had to be prematurely interrupted in 1870 because of advancing Italian troops. In the short time, it issued definitions of the Catholic faith, the papacy and papal infallibility . Many issues remained incomplete, such as a definition of the Church and the authority of the bishops. Many French Catholics desired the dogmatization of Papal infallibility and the assumption of Mary in the ecumenical council.

[ 31 ] Nine mariological petitions favoured a possible assumption dogma, which however was strongly opposed by some council fathers, especially from Germany . On May 8, the fathers rejected a dogmatization at that time, a decision shared by Pope Pius IX. The concept of co-redemptrix was also discussed but left open. In its support, council fathers highlighted the divine motherhood of Mary and called her the mother of all graces.

[ 32 ] But by the time of Vatican II it was passed over for reasons given [ 33 ] and later avoided because of its ambiguity. The council met in four sessions from 8 December 1869, to 18 July 1870.

[ 29 ] Second Vatican Council [ edit ] Main article: Second Vatican Council The Second Vatican Council, also known as Vatican II, was convoked by Pope John XXIII and met from 1962 to 1965. Unlike most previous councils, it did not issue any condemnations, as its objective was pastoral. Despite this, it issued 16 magisterial documents: [ 34 ] four constitutions (on restoration of liturgical ritual "according to the pristine norm of the Fathers ", on the nature of the Church, on its relation to the modern world, and on promotion of Scripture and Biblical studies ); nine decrees (the mission activity of the church, the ministry and life of priests, priestly training, the apostolate of the laity, the renewal of religious life, the pastoral office of bishops, ecumenism, Eastern Catholic churches, and media and social communications); and three declarations (on Christian education, on non-Christian religions, and on religious liberty).

[ citation needed ] The general sessions of the council were held in the autumns of four successive years (in four periods ) 1962 through 1965. During the other parts of the year special commissions met to review and collate the work of the bishops and to prepare for the next session. Sessions were held in Latin in St. Peter's Basilica , with secrecy kept as to discussions held and opinions expressed. Speeches (called interventions ) were limited to ten minutes. Much of the work of the council, though, went on in a variety of other commission meetings (which could be held in other languages), as well as diverse informal meetings and social contacts outside of the council proper.

Those eligible for seats at the council were 2,908 men, referred to as council fathers, including all bishops around the world, as well as many superiors of male religious orders. In the opening session 2,540 took part, making it the largest gathering in any council in church history. (This contrasts with Vatican I, where 737 attended, mostly from Europe.) [ 35 ] Attendance varied in later sessions from 2,100 to over 2,300. In addition, a varying number of periti (Latin for "experts") were available for theological consultation—a group that exercised a major influence as the council went forward. Seventeen Orthodox Churches and Protestant denominations sent observers.

[ 36 ] More than three dozen representatives of other Christian communities were present at the opening session, and the number grew to nearly a hundred by the end of the 4th council session.

Canon law concerning ecumenical councils [ edit ] The rules and practices concerning ecumenical Councils have varied over the centuries. Many of the earlier Councils were not subject to the rules currently in force, but were accepted as ecumenical due to the practice of the time.

[ 37 ] Today an ecumenical council can be convoked only by the Pope, [ 38 ] but the first eight councils (from the 4th to the 9th century) were convoked by the Christian Roman Emperor. Bishops are always the primary participants at councils, [ 39 ] but a variety of other people have attended different Councils: for instance 800 abbots – outnumbering the bishops -- and some secular rulers took part in the Fourth Lateran Council (1215). Today, the Pope decides on the matters to be discussed and the procedure to be followed at an ecumenical council, [ 40 ] but at all councils except the last two (Vatican I and II), these were decided by the assembled bishops.

Provisions of the 1983 Code of Canon Law concerning ecumenical councils include the authority of an ecumenical council, the authority of the Pope, and participants. The college of bishops , under and with its head the Pope, is "the subject of supreme and full power over the universal Church", [ 41 ] and exercises this power "in a solemn manner in an ecumenical council".

[ 42 ] The decisions of an ecumenical council are therefore binding on all. The Pope has the sole authority "to convoke an ecumenical council, preside over it personally or through others, transfer, suspend or dissolve a council, and to approve its decrees".

[ 43 ] It belongs to the Pope to "determine the matters to be treated in a council and establish the order to be observed in a council".

[ 44 ] The decrees of an ecumenical council do not have obligatory force unless they have been approved by the Pope and promulgated at his order.

[ 45 ] About its participants, it says: "All the bishops and only the bishops who are members of the college of bishops have the right and duty to take part in an ecumenical council with a deliberative vote." [ 46 ] Others "can be called to an ecumenical council by the supreme authority of the Church, to whom it belongs to determine their roles in the council." [ 47 ] Participation is limited to these persons, who cannot delegate their voting rights.

[ 48 ] See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Dicastery for Interreligious Dialogue International Council of Christians and Jews , a group engaged in Christian-Jewish dialogue John Paul II Center for Interreligious Dialogue References [ edit ] ^ Hubert Jedin , Kleine Konziliengeschichte , Freiburg, Herder, 1960, 14 ^ 1983 CIC, 1983 Code of Canon Law , https://www.vatican.va/archive/cod-iuris-canonici/cic_index_en.html , 439 ^ 1983 CIC, 440 ^ "The 21 Ecumenical Councils" .

Catholic Answers . Retrieved April 16, 2019 .

^ "Catholic Library: The 21 Ecumenical Councils" .

www.newadvent.org . Retrieved April 16, 2019 .

^ Jedin 11 ^ a b Jedin 136 ^ a b Jedin 29 ^ a b Jedin 31 ^ Percival, Henry Robert (1900). The Seven Ecumenical Councils of the Undivided Church. A Select Library of Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers of the Christian Church (second series). Vol. XIV. James Parker & Co. p. 343 ^ a b Jedin 34 ^ Jedin 36 ^ Jedin 37 ^ Jedin 45 ^ Jedin 43 ^ Jedin 46 ^ Jedin 47 ^ Jedin 49 ^ Jedin 57 ^ Jedin 59 ^ Jedin 60 ^ Jedin 66 ^ Jedin 69 ^ a b Jedin 71 ^ Jedin 77 ^ "CCC Search Result - Paragraph # 1472" .

www.scborromeo.org . Retrieved April 16, 2019 .

^ a b c Jedin 79 ^ Hefele, Hergenroether, and Leclercq. Histoire des Conciles, vol. VIII/1 (Paris, 1917), pp. 522-523 ^ a b c Jedin, 138 ^ Wetterau, Bruce. World history. New York: Henry Holt and company. 1994.

^ Civilta Catolica February 6, 1869.

^ Bäumer Marienlexikon, Eos St.Ottilien 1988 566 ^ Lumen Gentium , 60, 62.

^ "Documents of the Second Vatican Council" .

^ Sullivan 2002, p.21 ^ "Vatican Council II", New Catholic Encyclopedia , vol. XIV, p. 563 ^ Jedin 10 ^ 1983 CIC, 338 §1 ^ 1983 CIC, 339 §1 ^ 1983 CIC, 338 §2 ^ 1983 CIC, 336 ^ 1983 CIC, 337 §1 ^ 1983 CIC, 338 §1 ^ 1983 CIC, 338 §2 ^ 1983 CIC, 341 §1 ^ 1983 CIC, 339 §1 ^ 1983 CIC, 339 §2) ^ Jedin, 9 Further reading [ edit ] Berington, Joseph (1830).

"The Office of Councils." .

The Faith of Catholics: confirmed by Scripture, and attested by the Fathers of the five first centuries of the Church, Volume 1 . Jos. Booker.

External links [ edit ] Catholic Encyclopedia: General Councils (see "Historical sketch of ecumenical councils" section) v t e Ecumenical councils First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I (325) Constantinople I (381) Ephesus (431) Chalcedon (451) Constantinople II (553) Constantinople III (680–681) Nicaea II (787) Recognized by the Catholic Church First seven ecumenical councils Constantinople IV (869–870) Lateran I (1123) Lateran II (1139) Lateran III (1179) Lateran IV (1215) Lyon I (1245) Lyon II (1274) Vienne (1311–1312) Constance (1414–1418) Basel-Florence (Basel/Lausanne: 1431–1449; [ a ] Ferrara/Florence: 1438–1445) Lateran V (1512–1517) Trent (1545–1563) Vatican I (1869–1870) Vatican II (1962–1965) Recognized by the Eastern Orthodox Church First seven ecumenical councils Constantinople IV (879–880) * Constantinople V (1341–1351)* Recognized by the Oriental Orthodox Church Nicaea I (325) Constantinople I (381) Ephesus (431) Ephesus II (449) [ citation needed ] Ephesus III (475) [ citation needed ] Recognized by the Church of the East Nicaea I (325) Constantinople I (381) Seleucia-Ctesiphon (410) [ citation needed ] Synod of Beth Lapat (484) [ citation needed ] See also Ancient church councils (pre-ecumenical) ( 50 /155– 314 ) Great Church (180– 451 ) State church of the Roman Empire ( 380 – 451 ) Quinisext Council (692) Synod of Jassy (1642) Synod of Jerusalem (1672) Synod of Constantinople (1872) Conference of Addis Ababa (1965) Pan-Orthodox Council (2016) * Ecumenical status disputed within the Eastern Orthodox Church.

^ Even though the Council was moved to Ferrara in 1438 and later to Florence, some bishops refused to move and remained in a parallel Council at Basel.

Links to related articles v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate Crusading movement History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles in the New Testament Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380–451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Clash against the empire Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Protestant Reformation Catholic Counter-Reformation Exsurge Domine Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine European wars of religion Thirty Years' War Baroque period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX United States Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazi Germany Mit brennender Sorge Pope John XXIII Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Ecumenism Judaism Pope Paul VI ( coronation ) Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa USSR Pope John Paul II HIV/AIDS World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 2023 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis Laudato si' Patriarch Kirill COVID-19 pandemic Pope Leo XIV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Catholic_ecumenical_councils&oldid=1303124117 " Category : Catholic Church councils Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from December 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 06:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Catholic ecumenical councils 7 languages Add topic

