Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Leadership 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Vatican Observatory 28 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Català Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano Lëtzebuergesch مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Suomi Tagalog Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 41°44′50″N 12°39′02″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.747222222222°N 12.650555555556°E ﻿ / 41.747222222222; 12.650555555556 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Astronomical observatory of the Holy See Observatory Vatican Observatory Organization Holy See Observatory code 036 Location Castel Gandolfo , Metropolitan City of Rome Capital , Lazio , Italy Coordinates 41°44′50″N 12°39′02″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.747222222222°N 12.650555555556°E ﻿ / 41.747222222222; 12.650555555556 Altitude 430 m (1,410 ft) Established 1930 Website www .vaticanobservatory .org Location of Vatican Observatory Related media on Commons [ edit on Wikidata ] The Vatican Observatory ( Italian : Specola Vaticana ) is an astronomical research and educational institution supported by the Holy See . Originally based in the Roman College of Rome , the Observatory is now headquartered in Castel Gandolfo , Italy and operates a telescope at the Mount Graham International Observatory in the United States .

[ 1 ] Father Guy Consolmagno has been Directory of the Observatory for ten years, from 2015 to 2025 and will be replaced [update] by Father Anthony D’Souza, S.J.

on 19 September 2025.

[ 2 ] In 2008, the Templeton Prize was awarded to cosmologist Fr.

Michał Heller , a Vatican Observatory Adjunct Scholar. In 2010, the George Van Biesbroeck Prize was awarded to former observatory director, the American Jesuit, Fr.

George Coyne .

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Vatican Observatory" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Church has had a long-standing interest in astronomy, due to the astronomical basis of the calendar by which holy days and Easter are determined. For instance, the Gregorian Calendar , promulgated in 1582 by Pope Gregory XIII , was developed by Aloysius Lilius and later modified by Christoph Clavius at the Collegio Romano from astronomical data. The Gregorian Tower was completed in 1580 for his purpose, designed by Bolognese architect Ottaviano Nonni .

In the 18th century, the Papacy actively supported astronomy, establishing the Observatory of the Roman College in 1774. In 1787–1789, the Specola Vaticana in the Tower of the Winds within the Vatican was established under the direction of Msgr. Filippo Luigi Gilii (1756–1821). When Msgr. Gilii died, the Specola was closed down because it was inconvenient for students in the city because the dome of St. Peter's obstructed its view. Its instruments were transferred to the College Observatory. A third facility, the Observatory of the Capitol, was operated from 1827 to 1870.

Father Angelo Secchi SJ relocated the College Observatory to the top of Sant'Ignazio di Loyola a Campo Marzio (Church of St. Ignatius in Rome ). In 1870, with the capture of Rome , the College Observatory fell into the hands of the Italian Government. Out of respect for his work, however, Father Secchi was permitted to continue using the Observatory. After Secchi's death in 1878 the Observatory was nationalized by the Italian government and renamed the Regio Osservatorio al Collegio Romano ("Royal Observatory at the Roman College"), ending astronomical research in the Vatican.

In 1891, however, Pope Leo XIII issued a Motu proprio re-founding the Specola Vaticana (Vatican Observatory) and a new observatory was built on the walls at the edge of the Vatican.

[ 4 ] The new Vatican Observatory remained there for the next forty years.

In the late nineteenth-century the Vatican Observatory was part of a group of top astronomy institutions from around the world which worked together to create a photographic "Celestial Map" (" Carte du Ciel ") and an "astrographic" catalog pinpointing the stars' positions. Italian astronomer Father Francesco Denza led the Vatican's contribution to the project until his death in 1894. In the early twentieth century, Father John Hagen took over the project and recruited a group of nuns from the Sisters of the Holy Child Mary to work on the necessary recording and calculations. The nuns, Sisters Emilia Ponzoni, Regina Colombo, Concetta Finardi and Luigia Panceri, helped map and catalog nearly half a million stars.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Silver medal celebrating the 1891 Pope Leo XIII's inauguration of the new observatory Vatican Observatory and pontifical palace, Castel Gandolfo By the 1930s, the smoke and sky-glow of the city had made it impossible to conduct useful observations in Rome.

[ 1 ] Pope Pius XI relocated the Observatory to Castel Gandolfo, which is 25 kilometres (16 mi) southeast of Rome. By 1961, the same problems with light pollution made observing difficult at Castel Gandolfo. The Observatory then established the Vatican Observatory Research Group (VORG) , with offices at the Steward Observatory of the University of Arizona in Tucson , Arizona .

[ 1 ] D.K.J. O'Connell produced the first color photographs of a green flash at sunset in 1960.

[ 7 ] In 1993, VORG completed construction of the 1.8 metres (71 in) Vatican Advanced Technology Telescope , which is at Mount Graham near Safford, Arizona .

Prof Sister Natalia Zotov OP SFCC spent two summers at the observatory, the first woman to work there as an astronomer.

[ 8 ] The Observatory's headquarters remain in Italy at Castel Gandolfo. In early 2008, the Vatican announced that the Observatory would be relocated to a former convent a mile away from the castle as part of a general reconstruction of the Papal residence. Its former space would be used to provide more room for the reception of diplomatic visitors. The old quarters in the castle were cramped and very poorly laid out for the Observatory's use. VORG research activities in Arizona continued unaffected.

Leadership [ edit ] Francesco Denza , B (1891–1894) Giuseppe Lais , CO (1894–1898) Ángel Rodríguez de Prada, OSA (1898-1905) [ 9 ] Johann Georg Hagen , SJ (1906–1930) Johan Stein , SJ (1930–1951) Daniel Joseph Kelly O'Connell , SJ (1952–1971) Patrick Treanor , SJ (1971–1978) George Coyne , SJ (1978–2006) [ 10 ] José Gabriel Funes , SJ (19 August 2006 [ 10 ] – 18 September 2015) [ 11 ] Guy Consolmagno , SJ (18 September 2015 [ 11 ] –19 September 2025) Anthony D’Souza, SJ (19 September 2025 [ 12 ] –present) See also [ edit ] Archaeoastronomy Catholic Church and science § Vatican Observatory Scientific Perspectives on Divine Action Vatican Advanced Technology Telescope List of astronomical observatories List of Jesuit sites Pietro Maffi Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Johnson, George (22 June 2009).

"Vatican's Celestial Eye, Seeking Not Angels but Data" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 24 June 2009 .

^ https://press.vatican.va/content/salastampa/en/bollettino/pubblico/2025/07/31/250731b.html ^ Dennis Sadowski (4 January 2010).

"American Astronomical Society honors former Vatican Observatory head" .

Catholic News Service . Archived from the original on 7 January 2010 . Retrieved 6 January 2010 .

^ History of the Vatican Observatory Archived 18 December 2012 at the Wayback Machine . Vatican Observatory Foundation. Retrieved 28 September 2013.

^ "Mapping with the stars: Nuns instrumental in Vatican celestial survey" .

www.catholicnews.com . Archived from the original on 29 April 2016 . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

^ Blakemore, Erin.

"These Little-Known Nuns Helped Map the Stars" .

Smithsonian Magazine . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

^ Maunder, Michael (2007).

Lights in the Sky: Identifying and Understanding Astronomical and Meteorological Phenomena . Springer. p. 72.

ISBN 978-1846287619 . Retrieved 28 September 2013 .

^ Williams, Deborah and Crean, Mike "Scientist devoted to religious faith", The Press (Christchurch) 14 Jul 2012" page C15 ^ "Real Academia de la Historia" .

^ a b "Rinunce e Nomine, 19.08.2006" (Press release) (in Italian). Holy See Press Office. 19 August 2006 . Retrieved 14 February 2020 .

^ a b "Rinunce e Nomine, 18.09.2015" (Press release) (in Italian). Holy See Press Office. 18 September 2015 . Retrieved 14 February 2020 .

^ Cite error: The named reference Dsouza was invoked but never defined (see the help page ).

References [ edit ] Sabino Maffeo: The Vatican Observatory. In the Service of Nine Popes , Vatican Observatory Publications, 2001.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Vatican Observatory .

Official website v t e Roman Curia of the Holy See Secretariat Secretariat of State Section for General Affairs Section for Relations with States Secretary for Pontifical Representations Dicasteries Evangelization Doctrine of the Faith Service of Charity Eastern Churches Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments Causes of Saints Bishops Clergy Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life Laity, Family and Life Christian Unity Interreligious Dialogue Culture and Education Integral Human Development Legislative Texts Communication Tribunals Apostolic Penitentiary Apostolic Signatura Roman Rota Economics Council for the Economy Secretariat for the Economy Administration of the Patrimony of the Apostolic See Office of the Auditor General Commission for Confidential Matters Committee for Investments Offices Prefecture of the Papal Household Office for the Liturgical Celebrations of the Supreme Pontiff Apostolic Camera Camerlengo of the Holy Roman Church Institutes Labour Office of the Apostolic See Vatican Apostolic Archive Vatican Apostolic Library Fabric of Saint Peter Pontifical Commission for Sacred Archaeology AVEPRO Supervisory and Financial Information Authority Domus Vaticanae Interdicasterial commissions Particular Churches Church in Eastern Europe Consecrated Religious Candidates to Sacred Order Revision of the General Regulations of the Roman Curia Commissions and committees International Eucharistic Congresses Historical Sciences Advocates Swiss Guard Disciplinary Financial Security Commission of Cardinals overseeing the Institute for Works of Religion Activities of Public Juridical Persons of the Church in the Healthcare Sector Verification and Application of Mitis Iudex in the Churches of Italy Other organizations Councils, commissions, and offices Evangelization International Council for Catechesis Doctrine of the Faith Pontifical Commission for the Protection of Minors International Theological Commission Pontifical Biblical Commission College for the review of appeals by clergy accused of delicta reservata Bishops Pontifical Commission for Latin America Clergy Pontifical Work for Priestly Vocations Christian Unity Commission for Religious Relations with the Jews Interreligious Dialogue Commission for Religious Relations with Muslims Culture and Education Pontifical Work for Ecclesiastical Vocations Communication Vatican Publishing House Vatican Media Vatican Radio L'Osservatore Romano Holy See Press Office Pontifical academies Arcadia Alphonsian Ecclesiastical Fine Arts and Letters of the Virtuosi al Pantheon Sciences Theology Archaeology Martyrs Saint Thomas Aquinas Immaculate Conception Mary Life Social Sciences Latin Papal See of Rome Vicar General for the Vatican City State Vicar General for the Vicariate of Rome Auxiliary Bishops of the Vicariate of Rome Prelate Secretary of the Vicariate of Rome History Roman Inquisition (1542) Reform by Sixtus V (1588) Reform by Paul VI (1967) Reform by John Paul II (1988) Reform by Francis (2022) Former dicasteries Congregation for Borders Congregation for Catholic Education Congregation of Ceremonies Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples Sacred Congregation of the Index Congregation of the Vatican Press Sacred Congregation of the Consulta Congregation for Indulgences and Sacred Relics Congregation of Rites Apostolic Chancery Apostolic Dataria Office of Papal Charities Secretariate of Briefs to Princes and of Latin Letters Special Administration of the Holy See Pontifical Council for Culture Pontifical Commission for the Cultural Heritage of the Church Pontifical Commission Ecclesia Dei Pontifical Council for Promoting the New Evangelization Pontifical Council for Social Communications Pontifical Council for the Family Pontifical Council for the Laity Pontifical Council Cor Unum Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace Pontifical Council for the Pastoral Care of Migrants and Itinerant People Pontifical Council for the Pastoral Care of Health Care Workers Vatican City portal Catholicism portal v t e Vatican City articles Index Outline Holy See Properties Pope : Leo XIV List of sovereigns Vicar General for Vatican City History History of the papacy " Prisoner in the Vatican " Circus of Nero Old St. Peter's Basilica Papal tombs Navicella Leonine City Cortile del Belvedere Santo Stefano degli Ungheresi Lateran Treaty Borgo Nuovo Borgo Vecchio Piazza Scossacavalli Geography Major basilica St. Peter's Basilica Chair of Saint Peter Door of the Dead Monument to the Royal Stuarts St. Peter's Baldachin Saint Longinus Pietà Vatican Necropolis Saint Peter's tomb Papal tombs Tomb of the Julii Vatican Grottoes Apostolic Palace Redemptoris Mater Chapel Borgia Apartments Clementine Hall Loggias Papal apartments Stufetta del cardinal Bibbiena Cappella Paolina Raphael Rooms Niccoline Chapel Sala Ducale Sala Regia Scala Regia The Vision of Constantine Sistine Chapel altarpiece ceiling Room of Tears Vatican Museums Historical Paintings Modern and Contemporary Art Pio-Clementino Chiaramonti Gregoriano Etrusco Gregoriano Egiziano Pio Cristiano Ethnographic Bramante Staircase Maps Gregorian Tower Casina Pio IV Sant'Anna dei Palafrenieri Domus Sanctae Marthae Holy Spirit Chapel Gardens Santa Maria della Pietà in Camposanto dei Teutonici Collegio Teutonico Teutonic Cemetery Mater Ecclesiae Monastery Sant'Egidio in Borgo Santi Martino e Sebastiano degli Svizzeri Paul VI Audience Hall The Resurrection Passetto di Borgo San Pellegrino in Vaticano St. Peter's Square Via della Conciliazione Fountains Porta San Pellegrino Ricciolo d'Italia Saint John's Tower Santo Stefano degli Abissini Vatican Pharmacy Vatican Hill Politics Elections Foreign relations Vicar General Law Crime Fundamental Law Governance Pope Leo XIV Cardinal Secretary of State Vacant Government Roman Curia Apostolic Camera Commissions For Vatican City State Councils Congregations Dicasteries Military Corps of Gendarmerie Swiss Guard See also: Corps of Firefighters Economy Banking Vatican euro coins Communications .va [Internet domain] Poste Vaticane Postage stamps and postal history Homelessness Secretariat for the Economy Tourism Infrastructure Transport Heliport Rail Culture Academy of Sciences AT telescope observatory Architecture Archives Apostolic Archive Climate Forest Demographics Languages Library film Music Sistine Chapel Choir Philatelic and Numismatic Office Public holidays Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Information Service Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Radio Vatican Television Center Vatican News App Vatican Publishing House Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio L'Osservatore Romano Pope2you Religion Catholic Church Symbols Anthem Coat of arms Flag Sports Amateur Sports Association Cricket team National football team (Men) National football team (Women) Vatican Athletics Vatican City portal Catholic Church portal v t e Astronomical observatories in Italy Arcetri Observatory Asiago Astrophysical Observatory Bassano Bresciano Brera Astronomical Observatory Cagliari Observatory Astronomical Observatory of Capodimonte Catania Astrophysical Observatory Cima Ekar Observing Station Collurania-Teramo Observatory European Gravitational Observatory Helmut Ullrich Astronomical Observatory International Latitude Observatory La Specola, Padua Medicina Radio Observatory Merate Astronomical Observatory Monte Mario Observatory Noto Radio Observatory Orioloromano Observatory Osservatorio Ximeniano Palermo Astronomical Observatory Panzano Observatory Pistoia Mountains Astronomical Observatory Rome Observatory San Vittore Observatory Santa Lucia Stroncone Astronomical Observatory Sormano Astronomical Observatory Specola di Lucca Astronomical Observatory of Trieste Observatory of Turin Vatican Observatory Italy portal Portals : Astronomy Stars Spaceflight Outer space Solar System Education Science Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vatican_Observatory&oldid=1304188794 " Categories : Astronomical observatories in Italy Organizations based in Vatican City Science and technology in Vatican City Holy See Catholic Church and science Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Pages with reference errors Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Pages with broken reference names Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2020 Short description matches Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles using Wikidata location map with locally defined parameters Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles with infoboxes completely from Wikidata Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from the future All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles needing additional references from October 2021 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 14:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vatican Observatory 28 languages Add topic

